
                      In the House of Geloë




The figure that stood framed in the warm light of the doorway did not
move or speak as the companions mounted the long board-bridge that
slanted from the doorstep to the lake’s edge. As Simon followed Binabik
up, carefully cradling the child Leleth, he could not help wondering why
this Geloë woman did not have an entranceway of a more permanent nature,
something at least with a rope handrail. His weary feet were having trouble
keeping to the narrow bridge.
   I suppose she doesn’t get many visitors, for one thing, he thought,
looking out across the rapidly darkening forest.
   Binabik pulled up short of the front step and bowed, almost bumping
Simon off into the still waters.
   “Valada Geloë,” he announced, “Binbines Mintahoqis requests your aid.
I bring travelers.”
   The figure in the doorway stepped back, leaving the way open.
   “Spare me the Nabbanai constructions, Binabik.” It was a harshly
musical voice, heavily and strangely accented, but unmistakably a
woman’s. “I knew it was you. Qantaqa has been here an hour.” At the shore
end of the ramp the wolf pricked her ears forward. “Of course you are
welcome. Do you think I would deny you?”
   Binabik entered the house. Simon, a step behind, spoke up.
   “Where shall I put the little girl?” He ducked through the door, getting a
quick impression of a high roof and long, fluttering shadows cast by the
flames of many candles, then Geloë stepped in front of him.
   She was dressed in a rough robe of dun cloth, clumsily tied with a belt.
Her height was somewhere between Simon’s and the troll’s, her face wide
and sunbrowned, seamed with wrinkles at both the eyes and mouth. Her
dark hair was shot all through with gray and cut short, so that she looked
almost like a priest. But it was her eyes that caught him—round, heavy-
lidded yellow eyes with large, jet-black pupils. They were old, knowing
eyes, as though they belonged to some ancient bird of the heights, and there
was a power behind them that fixed him in his tracks. She seemed to
measure him completely, to turn him inside out and shake him like a sack,
all in a moment. When her gaze at last flicked down to the injured girl, he
felt drained like an empty wineskin.
   “This child is hurt.” It was not a question.
   Simon helplessly let her take Leleth from his arms as Binabik came
forward.
   “She has been attacked by dogs,” the troll said. “Dogs with the brand of
Stormspike.”
   If he expected a look of surprise or fear, he was disappointed. Geloë
pushed briskly past to a straw pallet on the floor, where she laid the girl
down. “Find food if you are hungry,” she said. “I must work now. Were you
followed?”
   Binabik was hurriedly telling her of the most recent events, Geloë all the
while undressing the unresponsive body of the child, when Malachias
finally entered. He squatted down near the pallet, hovering as Geloë cleaned
Leleth’s wounds. When Malachias leaned too close, blocking her
movements, the valada gently touched the boy’s shoulder with a sun-
freckled hand. She held the contact, staring at him for a moment, until
Malachias glanced up and flinched. After a moment he raised his eyes to
Geloë’s once more, and something seemed to pass silently between them
before Malachias turned away and sat back against the wall.
   Binabik poked up the fire, ingeniously set in a deep well in the floor. The
smoke—there was surprisingly little—rose up to the ceiling; Simon
imagined there must be a chimney hidden in the shadows overhead.
   The cottage itself, which was really one large room, reminded him in
many ways of Morgenes’ study chambers. Many strange objects were hung
on the clay-plastered walls: leafy branches tied in careful sheaves, bags of
dried flowers spilling their petals, and stalks, reeds, and long, slippery roots
that looked as though they had come grudgingly from the lake below. The
firelight also flickered across a multitude of tiny animal skulls, limning
their bright, polished surfaces without penetrating the darkness of the eyes.
   One entire wall was divided between floor and ceiling by a waist-high
shelf of frame-stretched bark; it, too, was covered with curious objects:
animal pelts and tiny bundles of sticks and bones, beautiful water-smoothed
rocks of every shape and color, and a carefully stacked aggregation of
scrolls, handles facing out like a cord of firewood. It was so cluttered that it
took Simon a moment to realize it was not really a shelf at all, but a writing
table; beside the scrolls was a stack of vellum, and a quill pen in an inkwell
made from another animal skull.
   Qantaqa whined softly and nosed against his thigh. Simon scratched her
muzzle. There were cuts on her face and ears, but the fur had been carefully
cleaned of dried blood. He turned from the table to the wide wall that faced
out on the lake with its two small windows. The sun was gone now, and the
candlelight streaming out made two long, irregular rectangles on the water;
Simon could see his own gangly silhouette in one of them, like the pupil of
a bright eye.
   “I have warmed some soup,” Binabik said behind him, and offered a
wooden bowl. “I have need of it myself,” the troll smiled, “and so do you
and everyone else. I hope to never have another day the like of this.”
   Simon blew on the hot liquid, then sucked a little past his lips. It was
tangy and a little bitter, like mulled Elysiamansa cider.
   “It’s good,” he said, and sipped a little more. “What is it?”
   “Better that you are not asking, perhaps,” Binabik grinned
mischievously. Geloë looked up from the pallet, eyebrows slanting down to
the bridge of her sharp nose, and fixed Binabik with a penetrating glance.
   “Stop that, troll, you’ll give the boy stomach pains,” she snorted irritably.
“Honeylock, dandelion, and stonegrass is all that’s in it, boy.”
   Binabik seemed chastened. “Apologies, Valada.”
   “I like it,” Simon said, worried that he had somehow offended her, even
if only as the recipient of Binabik’s teasing. “Thank you for taking us in.
My name is Simon.”
   “Ah,” grunted Geloë, then turned back to cleansing the little girl’s
injuries. Nonplussed, Simon finished his broth as quietly as he could.
Binabik took the bowl and refilled it; he finished that one almost as quickly.
   Binabik began combing Qantaqa’s thick pelt with his stubby fingers,
tossing the burrs and twigs he worked loose into the fire. Geloë was silently
applying dressings to Leleth while Malachias looked on, lank black hair
hanging in his face. Simon found a relatively uncluttered place to lean
against the cottage wall.
   A legion of crickets and other night singers filled the night’s hollow
spaces as Simon slid into exhausted sleep, his heart beating along in slow
time.

                                     •••

   It was still night when he awoke. He bobbed his head stupidly, trying to
clear away the sticky residue of a too-short sleep; it took a moment of
peering around the unfamiliar room until he remembered where he was.
   Geloë and Binabik were quietly talking, the woman on a high stool, the
troll cross-legged at her feet, like a student. Behind them on the pallet lay a
dark, bumpy shape that Simon at last recognized as Malachias and Leleth
huddled together in sleep.
   “It doesn’t matter whether you were clever or not, young Binabik,” the
woman was saying. “You have been lucky, which is a better thing.”
   Simon decided to let them know he was awake. “How is the little girl?”
he asked, yawning.
   Geloë turned her hooded stare toward him. “Very bad. Badly wounded
and feverish. The Nornhounds . . . well, it is not good to be bitten. They eat
unclean flesh.”
   “The valada has done all things that can be done, Simon,” Binabik said.
He had something in his hands: a new pouch that he was stitching out of
skin even as he spoke. Simon wondered where the troll might find new
darts. Oh, for a sword . . . even a knife! People on adventures always had
swords or sharp wits. Or magic.
   “Did you tell her . . .” Simon hesitated. “Did you tell her about
Morgenes?”
   “I already knew.” Geloë stared at him, firelight reddening her bright
eyes. When she spoke, it was with powerful deliberateness. “You were with
him, boy. I know your name, and I felt Morgenes’ mark upon you when I
touched you as I took the child.” As if to demonstrate, she held out her own
wide, callused hand.
   “You knew my name?”
   “Where the doctor is concerned, I know many things.” Geloë leaned over
and poked up the fire with a long, blackened stick. “A great man has been
lost, a man we can ill afford to lose.”
   Simon hesitated. Curiosity at last won out over awe. “What do you
mean?” He crawled across the floor to sit near the troll. “That is, what does
we mean?”
   “‘We’ means all of us,” she said. “‘We’ means: those who do not
welcome darkness.”
   “I have told Geloë what happened to us, friend Simon.” Binabik spoke
quietly. “There is no secret that I have few explanations.”
   Geloë made a wry face and pulled her coarse robe tighter around her
body. “And I have none to add . . . yet. It is clear to me now, however, that
the weather signs I have seen even here on my isolated lake, the north-
flying geese that should have gone clattering overhead a fortnight ago, all of
the things that have given me pause in this strange season,” she pushed her
palms together, as in a gesture of prayer, “they are real—and the change
they augur is real, also. Terribly real.” She dropped her hands heavily to her
lap and stared at them.
   “Binabik is right,” she said at last. Beside her the troll nodded his head
gravely, but Simon thought he saw a satisfied glint in the little man’s eyes,
as though he had been paid a great compliment. “This is far more than the
striving of a king and his brother,” she continued. “The contendings of
kings can beat down the land, can uproot trees and bathe the fields in
blood,” a log collapsed with a pop of sparks, and Simon jumped, “but the
wars of men do not bring dark clouds from the north, or send the hungry
bears back to their dens in Maia-month.”
   Geloë stood up and stretched, the wide sleeves of her robe hanging like
the wings of a bird. “Tomorrow I will try and find some answers for you.
Now all should sleep while they can, for I fear the child’s fever will return
strongly during the night.”
   She moved to the far wall and began putting small jars back on the
shelves. Simon spread his cloak on the floor near the edge of the fire well.
   “Perhaps you should not sleep so closely,” Binabik cautioned. “A spark
leaping out may set you on fire.”
   Simon looked at him carefully, but the troll did not appear to be joking.
He pulled his cloak back several feet and lay on top of it, rolling the hood
into a cushion beneath his head, then carefully pulled the sides up and over
himself. Binabik moved away toward the corner, and after a moment of
rustling and thumping made himself comfortable as well.
   The song of the crickets had died out. Simon stared into the shadows that
flickered in the rafters, and listened to the gentle hiss of the wind passing
endlessly through the branches of the circling trees and out across the lake.

                                    •••

   No lanterns were burning, and no fire; only the mushroom-pale light of
the moon filtered in through the high windows, painting the cluttered room
with a kind of frost-sheen. Simon stared around him at the curious,
unrecognizable silhouettes that littered the tabletops, and the blocky, inert
shapes of books stacked in crooked piles, sprouting up from the floor like
grave markers in a churchyard. His eyes were drawn to one particular book
that lay spread open, gleaming white like the flesh of a bark-stripped tree.
In the middle of the open page there was a familiar face—a man with
burning eyes, whose head wore the branching antlers of a stag.
   Simon looked up at the room, then back to the book. He was in
Morgenes’ chambers, of course. Of course! Where had he thought he was?
   Even as the realization came to him, as the silhouettes took on the
familiar shapes of the doctor’s flasks and racks and retorts, there was a
cautious scraping noise at the door. He started at the unexpected sound.
Diagonal stripes of moonlight made the wall seem to lean crazily. The
scraping came again.
   “. . . Simon . . . ?”
   The voice was very quiet, as though the speaker did not wish to be heard,
but he recognized it instantly.
   “Doctor?!” He leaped to his feet and crossed to the door in a few steps.
Why hadn’t the old man knocked? And what was he doing coming back so
late? Perhaps he had been away on some mysterious journey, and had
foolishly locked himself out—that was it, of course! Lucky that Simon was
there to let him in.
   He fumbled with the shadowy latch. “What have you been up to, Doctor
Morgenes?” he whispered. “I have been waiting for you for such a long
time!” There was no answer.
   Even as he worked the bolt from the slot, he was filled with a sudden
sense of unease. He stopped with the door half-unbarred, standing on his
tiptoes to peer down through a crack between the boards.
   “Doctor?”
   In the inner passageway, splashed in the blue light of the hall lamps, the
old man’s hooded, cloaked form stood before the door. His face was
shadowed, but there was no mistaking his tattered old cloak, his slight
build, the wisps of white hair that straggled from his hood, blue-tinted in the
lampglow. Why wouldn’t he answer? Was he hurt?
   “Are you all right?” Simon asked, swinging the door inward. The small,
bowed figure did not move. “Where have you been? What have you found
out?” He thought he heard the doctor say something, and bent forward.
   “What?”
   The words that rose up to him were full of air, painfully harsh.
“. . . False . . . messenger . . .” was all he understood—the dry voice
seemed to labor at speech—and then the face tilted up, and the hood fell
back.
   The head that wore the ragged fringe of white hair was a burnt,
blackened ruin: a knob with cracked, empty pits for eyes, the spindly neck
on which it wobbled a charred stick. Even as Simon staggered away, an
unfreeable scream lodged in his throat, a thin red line spread across the
front of the black, leathery ball; an instant later the mouth yawned open, a
split grin of pink meat.
   “. . . The . . . false . . . messenger . . .” it said, each word a rustling gasp.
“. . . Beware . . .”
   And then Simon did scream, until the blood pounded in his ears, for the
burned thing spoke, beyond a doubt, with the voice of Doctor Morgenes.

                                       •••
    His speeding heart took a long time to slow. He sat, breathing raggedly,
and Binabik sat beside him.
    “There is nothing of harm here,” the troll said, then pressed his palm
against Simon’s forehead. “You are chilled.”
    Geloë strode back from the pallet where she had replaced Malachias’
blanket, kicked free when Simon’s cry had startled him awake.
    “You had powerful dreams like this when you lived at the castle, boy?”
she asked, fixing him with a stern eye as if daring him to deny it.
    Simon shivered. Faced with that overwhelming gaze, he felt no urge to
tell anything but the truth. “Not until . . . until the last few months
before . . . before . . .”
    “Before Morgenes died,” said Geloë flatly. “Binabik, unless the learning
I have has deserted me completely, I cannot believe this is chance, for him
to dream of Morgenes in my house. Not a dream like that.”
    Binabik ran a hand through his own sleep-tousled hair. “Valada Geloë, if
you do not know, how can I? Daughter of the Mountains! I feel that I am
listening to noises in the dark. I cannot make out the dangers that surround
us, but dangers I know they are. Simon dreams of a warning against ‘false
messengers’ . . . but that is one only of too many mysterious things. Why
the Norns? The Black Rimmersman? The filthy Bukken?”
    Geloë turned to Simon and gently but forcefully pushed him back onto
his cloak. “Try and go back to sleep,” she said. “Nothing will enter the
house of the witch woman that can harm you.” She turned to Binabik. “I
think, if the dreaming he has described is as coherent as it seems, he will be
of use in our search for answers.”
    Lying on his back, Simon saw the valada and the troll as black shapes
against the firefly gleam of the embers. The smaller shadow leaned close to
him.
    “Simon,” Binabik whispered, “are there any other dreamings that have
been left out? That you have not told?”
    Simon slowly wagged his head from side to side. There was nothing,
nothing but shadows, and he was tired of talking. He could still taste the
fear from the burned thing in the doorway; he only wanted to surrender to
the sucking pull of oblivion, to sleep, to sleep. . . .
    But it did not come so easily. Although he held his eyes tightly closed,
still the images of fire and catastrophe rose before him. Tossing in place,
unable to find a position that would encourage his tight muscles to loosen,
he heard the quiet talk of the troll and the witch woman scratch away like
rats in the walls.
   Finally even that noise ceased, and the solemn breathing of the wind rose
again in his ears; he opened his eyes. Geloë was sitting alone before the
fire, shoulders up like a bird huddling from the rain, eyes half-open; he
could not tell if she was sleeping or watching the fire smolder out.
   His last waking thought, which rose slowly up from deep inside him,
flickering as it came like a fire beneath the sea, was of a tall hill, a hill
crowned with stones. That had been in a dream, hadn’t it? He should have
remembered . . . should have told Binabik.
   A fire sprang up in the darkness of the hilltop, and he heard the creaking
of wooden wheels, the wheels of dream.




   When morning came, it did not bring the sun with it. From the window
of the cottage Simon could see the dark treetops at the far edge of the bowl,
but the lake itself wore a thick cloak of fog. Even directly below the
window the water was hard to see, slowly swirling mist making all things
hazy and insubstantial. Above the top of the murky treeline the sky was a
depthless gray.
   Geloë had marched the boy Malachias out with her to gather a certain
healing moss, leaving Binabik behind to tend to Leleth. The troll seemed
faintly encouraged about the child’s condition, but when Simon looked at
her pale face and the faint movements of her small chest he wondered what
difference the little man could see that he could not.
   Simon rebuilt the fire from a pile of dead branches that Geloë had
stacked neatly in the corner, then went to help change the girl’s dressings.
   As Binabik peeled the sheet back from Leleth’s body and lifted away the
bandages Simon winced, but would not let himself turn away. Her whole
torso was blackened by bruises and ugly toothmarks. The skin had been
torn from under her left arm to her hip, a ragged slash a foot long. As
Binabik finished cleaning the wound and bound her up again with broad
strips of linen, little roses of blood bloomed through the cloth.
   “Does she really have a chance to live?” Simon asked. Binabik shrugged,
his hands engaged in the making of careful knots.
   “Geloë thinks she may,” he said. “She is a woman of a stern and direct
mind, who places people not above animals in her esteem, but that is still
esteem most high. She would not struggle against the impossible, I am
thinking.”
   “Is she really a witch woman like she said?”
   Binabik pulled the sheet up over the little girl, leaving only her thin face
exposed. Her mouth was partly open; Simon could see that she had lost
both her front teeth. He felt a sudden, bitter ache of empathy for the child—
lost with only her brother in the wild forest, captured and tormented,
frightened. How could the Lord Usires love such a world?
   “A witch woman?” Binabik stood up. Outside, Qantaqa clattered up the
front door bridge: Geloë and Malachias would be close behind. “A wise
woman she certainly is, and a being of rare strength. In your tongue I
understand ‘witch’ to mean a bad person, one who is of your Devil and does
her neighbors harm. That the valada is certainly not. Her neighbors are the
birds and the forest dwellers, and she tends them like a flock. Still, she was
leaving Rimmersgard many years ago—many, many years ago—to come
here. Possible it is that the people who once lived around her thought some
nonsense as that . . . perhaps that was the cause of her coming to this lake.”
   Binabik turned to greet the impatient Qantaqa, scratching through the
deep fur of her back as she wriggled in pleasure, then took a pot out to the
front door and lowered it down into the water. Returning, he hung it on a
hooked chain over the fire.
   “You have known Malachias from the castle, you said?”
   Simon was watching Qantaqa: the wolf had trotted back down to the lake
and was standing in the shallows, lunging at the water with her snout. “Is
she trying to catch fish?” he asked, laughing.
   Binabik smiled patiently and nodded. “And catch them she can do, too.
Malachias?”
   “Oh, Yes, I knew him there . . . a little. I caught him once, spying on me.
He denied it, though. Did he speak to you? Did he tell you what he and his
sister were doing in Aldheorte, how they were captured?”
   Qantaqa had indeed caught a fish, a shining silver thing that fluttered
wildly but pointlessly as the wolf mounted onto the lake’s edge, streaming
with water.
    “More luck I would be having trying to teach a rock to sing.” Binabik
found a bowl of dried leaves on one of Geloë’s shelves and crumbled a
handful into the pot of boiling water. Instantly, the room was full of warm,
minty smells. “Five or six words I have heard from his mouth since we
found them up in that tree. He remembers you, though. Several times I have
seen him at staring at you. I think he is not dangerous—in fact, I have a real
sureness of it—but still, he is in need of watching.”
    Before he could speak, Simon heard Qantaqa give a short bark down
below. He looked out the window in time to see the wolf spring up, her
mostly-devoured catch left on the lakeshore, and bound away up the path;
within a moment she had disappeared into the mist. She soon came trotting
back, followed by two dim shapes that gradually became Geloë and the
odd, fox-faced boy Malachias. The two of them were talking animatedly.
    “Qinkipa!” Binabik snorted as he stirred the pot of water. “Now he is
speaking.”
    As she scraped her boots at the doorway, Geloë leaned her head inside.
“Fog everywhere,” she said. “The forest is sleepy today.” She entered
shaking out her cloak, followed by Malachias, who again looked wary. The
color was high in his cheeks.
    Geloë went promptly to her table and began sorting out the contents of a
pair of sacks. Today she was dressed like a man, in thick wool breeches, a
jerkin, and a pair of worn but sturdy boots. She exuded an air of calm force,
like a war captain who had made all possible preparations, and now waited
only for the battle to commence.
    “Is the water ready?” she asked.
    Binabik leaned over the pot and sniffed. “It is seeming to be,” he said
after a moment.
    “Good.” Geloë untied a small cloth bag from her belt and removed a
handful of dark green moss, still shiny with beads of water. After dumping
it unceremoniously into the pot she stirred it with the stick Binabik had
given her.
    “Malachias and I have been talking,” she said, squinting down into the
steam. “We have spoken of many things.” She looked up, but Malachias
only ducked his head, his pink cheeks even reddening a bit further, and
went to sit beside Leleth on the pallet. He took her hand and stroked her
pale, damp forehead.
   Geloë shrugged. “Well, we shall speak when Malachias is ready. For
now, we have tasks enough, anyway.” She lifted some of the moss on the
end of the stirring stick, poked it with her finger, then plucked a bowl from
a small wooden table and scooped the whole sticky mess out of the pot. She
carried the steaming bowl over to the mattress.
   While Malachias and the witch woman made poultices of the moss,
Simon walked down to the lakeside. The outside of the witch woman’s
cottage looked quite as odd by daylight as the inside seemed by night; the
thatched roof came to a point, like a strange hat, and the dark wood of the
walls was covered all over in black and blue rune-paintings. As he walked
around the house and down to the shore the letters disappeared and
reappeared as the angle of the sun changed. Mired in the dark shadows
beneath the hut, the twin stilts on which it stood also seemed covered with
some kind of unusual shingles.
   Qantaqa had returned to the carcass of her fish, delicately worrying the
last bits of meat loose from the slender bones. Simon sat beside her on a
rock, then moved a bit farther away in response to her warning growl. He
threw pebbles out into the swallowing mist, listening for the splash, until
Binabik came down to join him.
   “Break your fasting?” the troll asked, handing him a knob of crusty dark
bread liberally smeared with pungent cheese. Simon ate it quickly, then they
sat and watched a few birds picking in the sand of the lake shore.
   “Valada Geloë would like you to join us, to be part of the thing we are to
be doing this afternoon,” Binabik said at last.
   “What thing?”
   “Searching. Searching answers.”
   “Searching how? Are we going somewhere?”
   Binabik looked at him seriously. “In some way, yes—no, do not be
looking so cross! I will explain.” He cast a pebble. “There is a thing that is
done sometimes, when ways of finding things out are closed. A thing that
the wise can do. My master Ookequk called it walking the Road of
Dreams.”
   “But that killed him!”
   “No! That is to say . . .” the troll’s expression was worried as he searched
for words. “It is to say, yes, he died while on the road. But a man may die
on any road. That is not meaning that anyone who walks upon it will be
dying. People have been crushed by carts in your Main Row, but hundreds
of others walk upon it every day without harm.”
   “What exactly is the Road of Dreams?” Simon asked.
   “I must first admit,” Binabik said with a sad half-smile, “that the dream-
road is more dangerous than Main Row. I was taught by my master that this
road is like a mountain path higher than any others.” The troll lifted his
hand in the air above his own head. “From this road, although the climbing
of it has great difficulty, you can see things that never otherwise would you
have seen—things that from the road of every-day would be invisible.”
   “And the dream part?”
   “I was taught that by dreaming is one way to mount up to this road, one
any person can do.” Binabik furrowed his brow. “But when a person
reaches to the road by ordinary night dreaming, he cannot then be walking
along the road: he sees from one spot only, and then must come back down.
So—Ookequk told to me—this one does not often know what he is looking
at. Sometimes,” he gestured out at the mist that clung to the trees and lake,
“it is only fog that he sees. The wise one, though, can be walking along the
road, once he has mastered the art of climbing to it. He can be walking and
looking, seeing things as they are, as they change.”
   He shrugged. “Explaining is difficult. The dream-road is a place to go
and see things that cannot be seen clearly where we stand beneath the
waking sun. Geloë is a veteran of this journey. I have been given some
experience of it myself, although I am no master.”
   Simon sat staring quietly out across the water for a while, thinking about
Binabik’s words. The lake’s other shore was invisible; he wondered idly
how far away across the water it was. His tired memories of their arrival the
day before were as hazy as the morning air.
   Now that I come to think of it, he realized, how far have I come? A long
way, farther than I thought I would ever travel. And still have many leagues
to go, I’m sure. Is it worth the risk to better our chances of reaching
Naglimund alive?
   Why had such decisions fallen on him? It really was horribly unfair. He
wondered bitterly why God had picked him out for such mistreatment—if
indeed it was true, as Father Dreosan used to say, that He kept His eye on
everyone.
   But there was more to think about than just his anger. Binabik and the
others seemed to be counting on him, and that was something Simon was
not used to. Things were expected of him now.
   “I’ll do it,” he said finally. “But tell me one thing. What really happened
to your master? Why did he die?”
   Binabik slowly nodded his head. “I am told that there are two ways that
things can happen on the road . . . things that are dangerous. The first, and it
is usually happening only to the unskilled, is that if one tries to walk the
road without proper wisdom, it is possible to miss the places where the
dream-road and the track of earthbound life go separate ways.” He skewed
the palms of his hands. “The walker then cannot locate the way back. But
Ookequk, I am thinking, was far too wise for that.”
   Going lost and homeless in those imagined realms touched a responsive
point in Simon, and he sucked in a breath of damp air. “Then what
happened to Ook . . . Ookequk?”
   “The other danger, he was teaching me,” Binabik said as he stood up,
“was that there are other things beside the wise and the good that roam
upon the Road of Dreams, and other dreamers of a more dangerous sort. It
is my thinking that he met one of these.”
   Binabik led Simon up the little ramp into the cottage.

                                     •••

   Geloë unstoppered a wide pot and stuck two fingers in, bringing them
out covered with a dark green paste even stickier and stranger smelling than
the moss poultice.
   “Lean forward,” she said, and wiped a gob of it on Simon’s forehead just
above his nose, then did the same for herself and Binabik.
   “What is it?” Simon asked. It felt strange on his skin, both hot and cold.
   Geloë settled herself before the sunken fire and gestured for the boy and
troll to join her. “Nightshade, mockfoil, whitewood bark to give it the
proper consistency . . .” She ranged the boy, the troll, and herself around the
fireplace in a triangle, placing the pot on the floor by her knee.
   The sensation on his forehead was most curious, Simon decided as he
watched the valada throw green twigs onto the fire. White streamers of
smoke went writhing upward, turning the space between them into a misty
column through which her sulfurous eyes glowed, reflecting the firelight.
   “Now rub this on both your hands,” she said, scooping out another
gobbet for each of them, “and a dab on your lips—but not in your mouth!
Just a dab, there . . .”
   When all was finished, she had them reach out and join hands.
Malachias, who had not spoken since Simon and the troll had returned,
watched from the pallet beside the sleeping child. The strange boy looked
tense, but his mouth was set in a grim line, as though he willed himself to
keep his nervousness hidden. Simon stretched his arms out on both sides,
clasping Binabik’s small dry paw in his own left hand and Geloë’s sturdy
one in his right.
   “Hold tightly,” the witch woman said. “There is nothing terrible that will
happen if you let go, but it will be better if you hold on.” She cast her eyes
down and began to speak softly, the words inaudible. Simon stared at her
moving lips, at the drooping lids of her wide eyes; again he was struck by
how much she resembled a bird, a proud, steep-soaring bird at that. As he
continued to gaze through the column of smoke, the tingling on his palms,
forehead, and lips began to bother him.
   Darkness was suddenly all around, as though a dense cloud had passed
before the sun. In a moment he could see nothing but the smoke and the red
fireglow beneath it, all else had disappeared into the walls of blackness that
loomed up on either side. His eyes were heavy, and at the same time he felt
as though someone had pushed his face down in snow. He was cold, very
cold. He fell backward, toppling, and the blackness was all around him.
   After a time—and Simon had no idea how long it might have been, only
that through it all he could still faintly feel the grip on both his hands, a very
reassuring sensation—the darkness began to glow with a directionless light,
a light that gradually resolved itself into a field of white. The whiteness was
uneven: some parts of it shone like sunlight on polished steel; other places
were almost gray. A moment later the field of white became a vast,
glittering mountain of ice, a mountain so impossibly tall that its head was
hidden in the swirling clouds lining the dark sky. Smoke belched from
crevices in its glassy sides and streamed upward to join the cloud-halo.
    And then, somehow, he was inside the great mountain, flying as rapidly
as a spark through tunnels that led ever inward, dark tunnels that were
nevertheless lined with mirroring ice. Uncountable thousands of shapes
made their way through the mists and shadows and frostgleam—pale-faced,
angular shapes who marched the corridors in moving thickets of
glimmering spears, or tended the strange blue and yellow fires whose
smokes crowned the heights above.
    The spark that was Simon still felt two firm hands grasping his own, or
rather felt something else that told him he was not alone, for certainly a
spark could have no hands to hold. He was at last in a great chamber, a vast
hollow in the mountain’s center. The roof was so high above the ice-glazed
tiles of the floor that snow flurried down from its upper reaches, leaping,
whirling clouds of snow like armies of tiny white butterflies. In the center
of the immense chamber was a monstrous well, whose mouth flickered with
pale blue light, and which seemed the source of a hideous, heart-squeezing
fear. Some heat must have been floating up from its unguessable depths, for
the air above it was a roiling pillar of fogs, a misty column gleaming with
diffuse colors like a titan icicle catching the sun’s light.
    Hanging somehow in the fog above the well, its shape not quite clear or
its dimensions entirely guessable, was an inexplicable something: a thing
made up of many things and many shapes, all colorless as glass. It seemed
—as its lineaments appeared here and there in the swirling mist-pillar—a
creation of angles and sweeping curves, of subtle, frightening complexity.
In some not quite definable way it seemed an instrument of music. If so, it
was an instrument so huge, alien, and frightening that the spark that was
Simon knew he could never hear its awful music and live.
    Facing the well, in an angular seat of rime-crusted black rock, a figure
sat. He could see it clearly, as though suddenly he hovered directly over the
terrible, blue-burning well. It was cloaked in a white and silver robe of
fantastic intricacy. Snowy hair streamed down over its shoulders to blend
almost invisibly with the immaculate white garments.
    The pale form lifted its head, and the face was a mass of shining light. A
moment later, as it turned away again, he could see that it was only a
beautiful, expressionless sculpture of a woman’s face . . . a mask of silver.
    The dazzling, exotic face turned back toward him. He felt himself pushed
away, brusquely disconnected from the scene like a clinging kitten being
pulled free from the hem of a dress.
   A vision swam up before him that was somehow a part of the wreath of
fogs and the grim white figure. At first it was only another patch of
alabaster whiteness; gradually it became an angular shape crisscrossed with
black. The black shapes became lines, the lines became symbols; at last an
open book hung before him. On its opened page were letters Simon could
not read, twisting runes that wavered and then came clear.
   A timeless instant passed, then the runes began to shimmer once more.
They pulled apart and reformed themselves into black silhouettes, three
long, slender shapes . . . three swords. One had a hilt shaped like the Tree of
Usires, another a hilt like the right-angle crossbeams of a roof. The third
had a strange double guard, the cross pieces making; with the hilt, a sort of
five-pointed star. Somewhere, deep in Simon’s self, he recognized this last
sword. Somewhere, in a memory black as night, deep as a cave, he had seen
such a blade.
   The swords began to disappear, one by one, and when they were gone
only gray and white nothingness was left.
   Simon felt himself falling back—away from the mountain, away from
the well chamber, away from the dream itself. A part of him welcomed this
falling away, horrified by the terrible, forbidden places where his spirit had
flown, but another part of him did not want to let go.
   Where were the answers?! His whole life had been caught up, snagged
by the passage of some damnable, remorseless, uncaring wheel, and deep in
the part of himself that was most private, he was desperately angry. He was
frightened, too, trapped in a nightmare that would not end, but what he felt
now was the anger; at that moment, it was the stronger.
   He resisted the pull, fighting with weapons he did not understand to
retain the dream, to wring from it the knowledge he wanted. He seized the
fast-diminishing whiteness and furiously tried to mold it, to make it into
something that would tell him why Morgenes had died, why Dochais and
the monks of Saint Hoderund’s had perished, why the little girl Leleth lay
close to death in a hut in the depths of the wild forest. He struggled and he
hated. If a spark could weep, he wept.
   Slowly, painfully, the ice mountain formed again from the blankness
before him. Where was the truth? He wanted answers! As Simon’s dream-
self struggled, the mountain grew taller, grew more slender, began sprouting
branches like an icy tree as it reached into the heavens. Then the branches
fell away, and it was only a smooth white tower—a tower that he knew.
Flames burned at its summit. A great, booming sound came, like the tolling
of a monstrous bell. The tower wavered. The bell thundered again. This was
something of dreadful importance, he knew, something ghastly, something
secret. He could feel an answer almost within reach. . . .
   Little fly! You have come to us, have you?
   A horrible, searing black nothingness reached up and engulfed him,
blocking out the tower and the sounding bell. He felt the breath of life
burning away inside his dream-self as infinite coldness closed around him.
He was lost in the screamingly empty void, a tiny speck at the bottom of a
sea of infinite black depths, cut free from life, breath, thought. Everything
had vanished . . . everything except the horrible, crushing hatred of the
thing that gripped him . . . smothered him.
   And then, beyond all hope, he was free.
   He was soaring, dizzyingly high above the world of Osten Ard, clutched
in the strong talons of a large gray owl, flying like the wind’s own child.
The ice mountain was disappearing behind him, swallowed up in the
immensity of the bone-white plain. In impossibly swift moments the owl
carried him away, over lakes and ice and mountains, winging toward a dark
line on the horizon. Just as it came clear to him, as the line became a forest,
he felt himself beginning to slip from the owl’s claws. The bird clutched
him tighter, and dropped earthward in a whistling dive. The ground leaped
up, and the owl spread her wide wings. They flattened out, gliding, and
whirled across the snowfields toward the security of the forest.
   And then they were under the eaves, and safe.

                                     •••

   Simon groaned and rolled over onto his side. His head was pounding like
Ruben the Bear’s anvil during tournament time. His tongue seemed swollen
to twice its normal size; the air he breathed tasted of metal. He pulled
himself into a crouch, moving his heavy head as slowly as possible.
   Binabik was lying nearby, his wide face pale; Qantaqa nosed at the troll’s
side, whimpering. Across the smoking fireplace dark-haired Malachias was
shaking Geloë, whose mouth hung slack, her lips gleaming wetly. Simon
groaned again as his head throbbed, hanging down between his shoulders
like a bruised fruit. He crawled to Binabik. The little man was breathing;
even as Simon leaned over him the troll began to cough, gasped for air, and
opened his eyes.
   “We . . .” he rasped, “we . . . are . . . all here?”
   Simon nodded, looking over to Geloë, still motionless despite Malachias’
attentions. “A moment . . .” he said, and slowly got to his feet.
   He walked gingerly out the hut’s front door carrying a small, empty pot.
He was faintly surprised to see that, despite the pall of fog, it was still full
afternoon: the time on the dream-road had seemed much longer than that.
He also had the nagging feeling that something else had changed outside
the cottage, but could not put his finger on what the difference was. The
view seemed slightly off. He decided it must be some effect of his
experience. After filling the pot with lake water and washing the sticky
green paste from his hands, he returned to the house.
   Binabik drank thirstily, then gestured that Simon should take the
container to Geloë. Malachias watched, half-hopeful, half-jealous, as Simon
carefully took the witch woman’s jaw in one hand and splashed a little
water into her open mouth. She coughed, then swallowed, and Simon gave
her a little more.
   As he held her head Simon was suddenly aware that, in some way, Geloë
had saved him while they were all walking in dream. As he looked down at
the woman, who was breathing more regularly now, he remembered the
gray owl who had caught him up when his dream-self had been at its final
gasp, and had borne him away.
   Geloë and the troll had not expected quite such a circumstance, he
sensed; in fact, it was Simon who had put them in such danger. For once,
though, he had no feelings of shame over his actions. He had done what
needed doing. He had been fleeing the wheel long enough.
   “How is she?” Binabik asked.
   “I think she will be well,” Simon replied, looking at the witch woman
carefully. “She saved me, didn’t she?”
   Binabik stared for a moment, hair hung in sweaty spikes on his brown
forehead. “It is likely that she did,” he said finally. “She is a powerful ally,
but even her strength has been by this taxed to the limit.”
   “What did it mean?” Simon asked now, releasing Geloë to the supporting
arms of Malachias. “Did you see what I saw? The mountain, and . . . and
the lady with the mask, and the book?”
   “I wonder if we saw all things the same, Simon,” Binabik answered
slowly. “But I am thinking it is important we wait until Geloë can share her
thoughts with us. Perhaps later, when we have eaten. I am full of terrible
hunger.”
   Simon gave the troll a shaky half-smile, and turned to find Malachias
staring at him. The boy started to turn away, then seemed to find some
internal resolution and held his stare, until it was Simon who began to feel
uncomfortable.
   “It was as if the whole house was shaking,” Malachias said abruptly,
startling Simon more than a little. The boy’s voice was strained, high-
pitched and hoarse.
   “What do you mean?” Simon asked, fascinated as much by the fact of
Malachias speaking as by what he said.
   “The whole cottage. While you three sat and stared at the fire, the walls
began to . . . to quiver. Like someone picked it up and set it down again.”
   “Most likely it was only the way we were moving while we were . . . I
mean . . . oh, I don’t know.” Simon gave up in disgust. The truth was, he
didn’t really know anything right at this moment. His brains felt as though
they’d been stirred with a stick.
   Malachias turned away to give more water to Geloë. Raindrops suddenly
began to patter down onto the windowsill; the gray sky could hold back its
burden of storm no longer.

                                     •••

   The witch woman was grim. They had pushed aside the soup bowls and
sat facing each other on the bare floor: Simon, the troll, and the mistress of
the cottage. Malachias, although obviously interested, remained on the bed
beside the little girl.
   “I saw evil things moving,” Geloë said, and her eyes flashed. “Evil
things that will shake the roots of the world we know.” She had recovered
her strength, and something else: she was solemn, and grave as a king in
judgment. “I almost wish we had not taken the dream-path—but that is an
idle wish, from the part of me that wants just to be left alone. I see darker
days coming, and I fear to be drawn in by events so ill-omened.”
    “What do you mean?” Simon asked. “What was all that? Did you see the
mountain, too?”
    “Stormspike.” Binabik’s voice was strangely flat. Geloë looked over at
him, nodded, then turned back to Simon.
    “True. It was Sturmrspeik we saw, as they call it in Rimmersgard, where
it is a legend, as far as Rimmersmen are concerned. Stormspike. The
mountain of the Norns.”
    “We Qanuc,” Binabik said, “know Stormspike to be real. But still, the
Norns have not been intruding on the affairs of Osten Ard since time
beyond time. Why now? It looked to me as if, as if . . .”
    “As if they were preparing for war,” Geloë finished for him. “You are
right, if the dream is to be trusted. Whether it was true-seeing, of course,
would take a better-trained eye than even mine. But you said the hounds
that pursue you wear the brand of Stormspike; that is real evidence in the
waking world. I think we can trust this part of the dream, or at least I think
we ought to.”
    “Preparing for war?” Simon was already confused. “Against who? And
who was the woman in the silver mask?”
    Geloë looked very tired. “The mask? Not a woman. A creature out of
legend, you could say, or a creature out of time beyond time, as Binabik put
it. That was Utuk’ku, the Queen of the Norns.”
    Simon felt a chill sweep over him. The wind outside sang a cold and
lonely song. “But what are these Norns? Binabik said they were Sithi.”
    “The old wisdom says that they were part of the Sithi once,” Geloë
responded. “But they are a lost tribe, or renegades. They never came to
Asu’a with the rest of their folk, but disappeared into the unmapped north,
the icy lands beyond Rimmersgard and its mountains. They chose to
separate themselves from the doings of Osten Ard, although that seems to
be changing.”
    For a moment Simon saw a flicker of deep unease cross the witch
woman’s sour, practical face.
    And these Norns are helping Elias chase me? he thought, feeling panic
rise again. Why am I sunk in this nightmare?
   Then, as if his fright had opened a door in his mind, he remembered
something. Unpleasant shapes climbed up from the hidden places in his
heart, and he struggled to catch his breath.
   “Those . . . those pale people. The Norns. I’ve seen them before!”
   “What!?” Geloë and the troll spoke at the same time, leaning forward.
Simon, startled by their intensity, backed away.
   “When?” Geloë snapped.
   “It happened . . . I think it happened: it may have been a dream . . . on the
night I ran away from the Hayholt. I was in the lich-yard, and I thought I
heard something calling my name—a woman’s voice. I was so frightened
that I ran away, out of the lich-yard and toward Thisterborg.” There was a
stirring on the pallet: Malachias nervously shifting position. Simon ignored
him and continued.
   “There was a fire on top of Thisterborg, up among the Anger Stones. Do
you know them?”
   “I do.” Geloë’s response was matter of fact, but Simon sensed some
weight behind the words he did not understand.
   “Well, I was cold and frightened, so I climbed up. I’m sorry, but I was so
sure that this was a dream. Perhaps it is.”
   “Perhaps. Go on.”
   “There were men on the top. They were soldiers, I could tell because
they wore armor.” Simon felt a thin sweat break on his palms, and rubbed
them together. “One of them was King Elias. I was frightened even more,
then, so I hid. Then . . . then there was a horrible creaking noise, and a black
wagon came up the far side of the hill.” It was coming back, all coming
back . . . or, at least, it seemed like all . . . but there were still empty
shadows. “Those pale-skinned people—the Norns, that’s what they were—
were with it, several of them, dressed in black robes.”
   There was a long pause while Simon struggled to remember. Rain
drummed on the cottage roof.
   “And?” the valada asked at last, gently.
   “Elysia Mother-of-God!” Simon swore, and tears started in his eyes. “I
can’t remember! They gave him something, something from the wagon.
Other things happened, too, but it feels like it’s all under a blanket in my
head. I can touch it, but I can’t tell what it is! They gave him something! I
thought it was a dream!” He buried his face in his hands, trying to squeeze
the painful thoughts from his whirling head.
   Binabik awkwardly patted Simon’s knee. “This is perhaps answering our
other question. I, too, pondered over why the Norns should be readying for
battle. I wondered if they would be fighting against Elias the High King, as
some age-old grievance against mankind. Now, it has the appearance to me
that they are helping him. Some kind of bargain has been struck. Possibly it
was that which Simon saw. But how? How could Elias ever make such
compact with the secretive Norns?”
   “Pryrates.” As soon as Simon said it, he was sure it was true. “Morgenes
said that Pryrates opened doors, and that terrible things came through.
Pryrates was on that hill, too.”
   Valada Geloë nodded her head. “It makes a kind of sense. A question that
must be answered, but one that I am sure is beyond our powers, is—what
was the bargaining-tally? What could these two, Pryrates and the king, have
to offer to the Norns for their aid?”
   They shared a long silence.
   “What did the book say?” Simon asked abruptly. “On the dream-road.
Did you see the book, too?”
   Binabik thumped the heel of his hand against his chest. “It was there.
The runes I saw were of Rimmersgard: ‘Du Svardenvyrd.’ In your speech it
means: ‘The Spell of the Swords.’”
   “Or Weird of the Swords,” Geloë added. “It is a famous book in the
circles of the wise, but it has been long lost. I have never seen it. It is said to
have been written by Nisses, a priest who was a counselor to King Hjeldin
the Mad.”
   “The one Hjeldin’s tower is named after?” Simon asked her.
   “Yes. That is where Hjeldin and Nisses both died.”
   Simon considered. “I saw three swords, too.”
   Binabik looked to Geloë. “Only shapes was I seeing,” the troll said
slowly. “I thought they might have the look of swords.”
   The witch woman had not been sure, either. Simon described the
silhouettes, but they meant nothing to her or to Binabik.
   “So,” the little man said at last, “we have learned what from the dream-
road—that the Norns are giving aid to Elias? This we guessed. That a
strange book is playing some part . . . perhaps? This is a new thing. We
were given a dream-glimpse of Stormspike, and the halls of the mountain’s
queen. We may have learned things that we do not understand yet—still, I
am thinking, one thing has changed not at all: we must take ourselves to
Naglimund. Valada, your house will be protection for a while, but if Josua
lives he has need to know of these things.”
    Binabik was interrupted from an unexpected quarter. “Simon,” Malachias
said, “you said someone called you in the lich-yard. It was my voice you
heard. I was the one calling you.”
    Simon could only gape.
    Geloë smiled. “At last, one our mysteries begins to speak! Go on, child.
Tell them what you must.”
    Malachias blushed furiously. “I . . . my name is not Malachias. It is . . .
Marya.”
    “But Marya is a girl’s name,” Simon began, then broke off at the sight of
Geloë’s widening grin. “A girl . . . ?” he said lamely. He stared at the
strange boy’s face, and suddenly saw it for what it was. “A girl,” he
grunted, feeling impossibly stupid.
    The witch woman chuckled. “It was obvious, I must say—or it should
have been. She had the advantage of traveling with a troll and a boy, and the
cloak of confusing, dangerous events, but I told her the deception could not
last.”
    “Especially not all the way to Naglimund, and that is where I must go.”
Marya rubbed her eyes wearily. “I have an important message to bear to
Prince Josua from his niece, Miriamele. Please do not ask me what it is, for
I may not tell you.”
    “What of your sister?” Binabik asked. “She will not be able to travel for
a long time.” He, too, squinted at the surprising Marya, as if trying to
discover how he had been fooled. It did seem obvious, now.
    “She is not my sister,” Marya said sadly. “Leleth was the princess’
handmaiden. We were very close. She was frightened to stay in the castle
without me, and was desperate to come along.” She looked down at the
sleeping child. “I should never have brought her. I tried to pull her up into
the tree before the dogs caught us. If I had only been stronger . . .”
    “It is not clear,” Geloë broke in, “whether the little girl will ever be able
to travel. She has not moved far from the brink of death. I am sorry to say
it, but it is the truth. You must leave her with me.”
   Marya started to protest, but Geloë would not listen. Simon was
disturbed to see what he thought was a glimmer of relief in the girl’s dark
eyes. It angered him to think she would leave the wounded child behind, no
matter how important the message.
   “So,” Binabik said finally, “where is it we are now? We still must reach
Naglimund, and we are blocked by leagues of forest and the steep slopes of
Wealdhelm. Not mentioning those who will be in our pursuit.”
   Geloë thought carefully. “It seems clear to me,” she said, “that you must
get through the forest to Da’ai Chikiza. That is an old Sithi place, long-
deserted, of course. There you can find the Stile, which is an old road
through the hills from a time when the Sithi regularly traveled between
there and Asu’a—the Hayholt. It is unused now, except by animals, but it
will be the easiest, safest place to cross. I can give you a map in the
morning. Yes, Da’ai Chikiza . . .” A deep light kindled in her yellow eyes,
and she nodded her head slowly, as if lost in thought. A moment later she
blinked, and became her brisk self once more. “Now you should sleep. We
should all sleep. The day’s doings have left me limp as a willow branch.”
   Simon didn’t think so. He thought the witch woman looked strong as an
oak tree—but he supposed even an oak could suffer in a storm.

                                    •••

    Later, as he lay curled in his cloak, the warm bulk of Qantaqa’s
somewhat intrusive presence against his legs, he tried to push away
thoughts of the terrible mountain. Such things were too vast, too murky.
Instead, he wondered what Marya must think of him. A boy, Geloë had
called him, a boy who did not know what a girl looked like. But that was
not fair—when had there been time to think about it?
    Why had she been spying in the Hayholt? For the princess, perhaps? And
if it had been Marya who called to him in the lich-yard, why? How had she
known his name, why had she bothered to learn it? He didn’t remember
ever seeing her at the castle—or at least not as a girl.
    When he at last floated off into sleep, like a tiny boat pushed out onto a
black ocean, he felt as though he pursued a receding light, a patch of
brightness just out of reach. Outside the windows, rain covered the dark
mirror of Geloë’s lake.