
                            Drums of Ice




The morning sun of the twenty-fourth day of Maia-month beamed
down on Hernysadharc, turning the golden disc atop the highest of the
Taig’s roofs into a circlet of brilliant flame. The sky was blue as an enamel
plate, as though Brynioch of the Skies had chased the clouds away with his
heavenly hazel stick, leaving them to lurk sullenly around the upper peaks
of the looming Grianspog.
   The sudden return of spring should have gladdened Maegwin’s heart. All
over Hernystir the untimely rains and cruel frosts had drawn a shroud over
both the land and her father Lluth’s people. Flowers had frozen in the
ground, unborn. Apples had dropped small and sour from the gnarled
branches in the orchards. The sheep and cows, put out to graze in sodden
fields, came back with rolling, frightened eyes, unnerved by hailstones and
gusting winds.
   A blackbird, insolently waiting until the last moment, hopped up from
Maegwin’s path into the denuded branches of a cherry tree where he trilled
disputatiously. Maegwin paid him no heed, but hitched up her long dress
and hurried toward her father’s hall.
   She ignored the voice calling her name at first, unwilling to be hindered
in her errand. Finally, reluctantly, she turned to see her half brother
Gwythinn running toward her. She stopped and waited for him, arms
folded.
   Gwythinn’s white tunic was disordered, and his golden neck torque had
ridden halfway around to the back, as though he were a child instead of a
young man of warrior age. He caught up and stood panting; she gave a snort
of dismay and set to straightening out his garments. The prince smirked, but
waited patiently while she pulled the torque around to lie against his
collarbone. His long brown mane of hair had largely pulled free of the red
cloth holding it in a careless horse tail. As she reached around to tie it, their
faces were eye-to-eye, although Gwythinn was by no means a short man.
Maegwin scowled.
   “Bagba’s Herd, Gwythinn, look at you! You must do better. You will be
king someday!”
   “And what has being king to do with how my hair is worn? Besides, I
was handsome enough when I started out, but I had to run like the very
wind to catch you, you with those long legs.”
   Maegwin flushed as she turned away. Her height was something about
which, try as she might, she could not be matter-of-fact.
   “Well, you’ve caught me up now. Are you going to the hall?”
   “I certainly am.” A sterner expression ran across Gwythinn’s face like
quicksilver, and he tugged at his long mustache. “I have things I must say to
our father”.
   “As do I,” Maegwin nodded, walking now. Their strides and heights so
evenly matched, their sorrel-colored hair so alike it might have been spun
from one wheel, any outsider would have guessed they were twins, instead
of Maegwin five years older and from a different mother.
   “Our best brood sow, Aeghonwye, died evening last. Another one,
Gwythinn! What is happening? Is it another plague, like at Abaingeat?”
   “If it is a plague,” her brother said grimly, fingering the leather-wrapped
hilt of his sword, “I know who brought it here. That man is a sickness on
legs.” He slapped the pommel and spat. “I only pray that he speaks out of
turn today. Brynioch! Would I love to cross blades with that one!”
   Maegwin narrowed her eyes. “Don’t be a fool,” she said crossly,
“Guthwulf has killed a hundred men. And, strange as it may seem, he is a
guest at the Taig.”
   “A guest who insults my father!” Gwythinn snarled, pulling his elbow
from Maegwin’s gentle, prisoning grasp. “A guest who brings threats from
a High King drowning in his own poor kingship—a king who struts and
bullies and spends golden coins like they were pebbles, then turns to
Hernystir and demands we help him!” Gwythinn’s voice was rising, and his
sister darted a glance around, worried who might hear. There was no one in
sight but the pale shapes of the door guards a hundred paces away. “Where
was King Elias when we lost the road to Naarved and Elvritshalla? When
bandits and the gods know what else descended on the Frostmarch Road?”
Face flushed again, the prince looked up to find Maegwin no longer at his
side. He turned to see her standing, arms folded, ten steps behind.
   “Have you finished, Gwythinn?” she asked. He nodded, but his mouth
was tight. “Good, then. The difference between our father and yourself,
fellow, is more than only thirty-some years. In those years he has learned
when to speak, and when to keep his thoughts inside. That is why, thanks to
him, someday you stand to be King Gwythinn, and not just the Duke of
Hernystir-Duchy.”
   Gwythinn stared for a long moment. “I know,” he said at last, “you
would have me be like Eolair, and bow and scrape to the dogs of Erkynland.
I know you think Eolair is the sun and moon—regarding not what he thinks
of you, king’s daughter though you be—but I am not such a man. We are
Hernystiri! We crawl for no one!”
   Maegwin glared, stung by the jab over her feelings for the Count of Nad
Mullach—about whom Gwythinn was exactly right: the attention he
showed her was only that due to a king’s gawky, unmarried daughter. But
the tears she dreaded did not come; instead, as she looked at Gwythinn, his
handsome face twisted by frustration, by pride, and not least by genuine
love of his people and land, she saw again the little brother she had once
carried on her shoulder—and whom she herself had, from time to time,
teased into tears.
   “Why are we fighting, Gwythinn?” she asked wearily. “What has brought
this shadow down on our house?”
   Her brother lowered his gaze to his boot tops, embarrassed, then
extended his hand. “Friends and allies,” he said. “Come, let us go in and see
Father before the Earl of Utanyeat comes slinking in to bid fond farewells.”

                                    •••

   The windows of the Taig’s great hall were thrown open; the sunlight
streaming through was full of sparkling dust from the rushes spread across
the floor. The thick wall timbers, hewed from the oak trees of the Circoille,
were fitted so carefully that not a gleam of light showed between them. Up
among the roofbeams hung a thousand painted carvings of the gods of the
Hernystiri, of heroes and monsters, all twisting slowly in the rafters as
reflected light shone warmly on their polished wooden features.
   At the hall’s far end, sun splashing in on either side, King Lluth ubh-
Llythinn sat in his huge oaken chair, beneath the carved stag’s head that
strained upward from the chair’s back, antlers of real horn fixed to its
wooden skull. The king was eating a bowl of porridge and honey with a
bone spoon while Inahwen, his young wife, sat on a lower chair at his side,
putting a tracery of delicate stitching onto the hem of one of Lluth’s robes.
   As the sentries banged their spear points twice upon their shields to
signal Gwythinn’s arrival—lesser nobility such as Count Eolair received
only a single beat, while the king himself received three, and Maegwin not
a one—Lluth looked up and smiled, placing his bowl down on the arm of
his chair and wiping his gray mustache on his sleeve. Inahwen saw the
gesture and gave Maegwin a despairing woman-to-woman look that Lluth’s
daughter resented more than a little. Maegwin had never really gotten used
to Gwythinn’s mother Fiathna taking the place of her own (Maegwin’s
mother Penemhwye had died when Maegwin was four), but at least Fiathna
had been Lluth’s age, not a mere girl like Inahwen! Still, this young,
golden-haired woman was good-hearted, although perhaps a little slow of
wit. It was not really Inahwen’s fault she was a third wife.
   “Gwythinn!” Lluth half-rose, brushing crumbs from the lap of his belted
yellow robe. “Are we not lucky to have the sun today?” The king swept a
hand window-ward, as pleased as a child who has learned a trick. “It is a
certain thing that we need a little, eh? And perhaps it will help to put our
guests from Erkynland,” he made a wry face, his mobile, clever features
shifting into a look of bemusement, eyebrows arching above the thick,
crooked nose broken in his boyhood, “to put them in a more agreeable
mood. Do you think?”
   “No, I do not think that, father,” Gwythinn said, approaching as the king
settled back into his antler-crested seat. “And I hope the answer you give
them today, if I may presume, will send them away in an even fouler one.”
He pulled up a stool and sat at the king’s feet just below the raised platform,
sending a harper scuttling. “One of Guthwulf’s soldiers picked a fight with
old Craobhan last evening. I had a hard time preventing Craobhan from
feathering the bastard’s back with an arrow.”
   Lluth looked troubled for a moment, then the look was gone, hidden
behind the smiling mask that Maegwin knew so well.
   Ah, father, she thought, even you are finding it a bit hard to keep the
music playing while these creatures bay all around the Taig. She walked
quietly forward and sat on the platform by Gwythinn’s stool.
   “Well,” the king grinned ruefully, “sure it is that King Elias could have
chosen his diplomats with a bit more care. But today in an hour they are
gone, and peace descends again on Hernysadharc.” Lluth snapped his
fingers and a serving boy sprang forward to take his dish of porridge away.
Inahwen watched critically as it went by.
   “There,” she said reproachfully. “You didn’t finish again. What am I to
do with your father?” she added, this time directing her gaze to Maegwin,
smiling fondly as though Maegwin, too, was a soldier in the constant battle
to make Lluth finish his meals.
   Maegwin, still at a loss as to how to deal with a mother a year younger
than herself, hastily broke the silence. “Aeghonwye died, Father. Our best,
and the tenth sow this month. And some of the others have gotten very
thin.”
   The king frowned. “This cursed weather. If Elias could but keep this
spring sun overhead, I’d give him any tax he asked.” He reached down to
pat Maegwin’s arm, but was not quite able to reach. “All we can do is pile
more rushes in the barns to keep out the chill. Failing that, we are in the
godly hands of Brynioch and Mircha.”
   There was another metallic clash of spear on shield, and the door-speaker
appeared, hands nervously clasped.
   “Your Highness,” he called, “the Earl of Utanyeat requests an audience.”
   Lluth smiled. “Our guests have decided to say farewell before they take
to their horses. Of course! Please, bring Earl Guthwulf in immediately.”
   But their guest, followed by several of his armored but unsworded men,
was already moving past the ancient servant.
   Guthwulf dropped slowly to his knee five paces before the platform.
“Your majesty . . . ah, and the prince, as well. I am fortunate.” There was no
hint of mockery in his voice, but his green eyes held an unsubtle fire. “And
Princess Maegwin,”—a smile—“the Rose of Hernysadharc.”
   Maegwin struggled to maintain her composure. “Sir, there was only one
Rose of Hernysadharc,” she said, “and since she was the mother of your
King Elias, I am surprised it should slip your mind.”
   Guthwulf nodded gravely. “Of course, lady, I sought only to pay a
compliment, but I must take exception to your calling Elias my king. Is he
not yours, too, under the High Ward?”
   Gwythinn shifted on his stool, turning to see what his father’s reaction
would be; his scabbard scraped on the wooden platform.
   “Of course, of course,” Lluth waved his hand slowly, as if beneath deep
water. “We have been through all this, and I see no need to belabor it. I
recognize the debt of my house to King John. We have always honored it, in
peace or war.”
   “Yes.” The Earl of Utanyeat stood, dusting the knees of his breeches.
“But what about your house’s debt to King Elias? He has shown great
tolerance . . .”
   Inahwen stood up, and the robe she had been sewing slid to the floor.
“You must excuse me,” she said breathlessly, plucking the garment up,
“there are things in the household I should attend to.” The king waved his
permission and she walked quickly but carefully between the waiting men
and slid out the half-opened door of the hall, as lithely as a doe.
   Lluth breathed a quiet sigh; Maegwin looked at him, seeing the always-
surprising lines of age that wreathed her father’s face.
   He is tired, and she, Inahwen, is frightened, Maegwin thought. I wonder
what I am? Angry? I’m not sure—exhausted, really.
   As the king stared at Elias’ messenger, the room seemed to darken. For a
moment Maegwin feared that clouds had covered the sun, that the winter
was returning; then she realized it was only her own apprehension, her
sudden feeling that something more than her father’s peace of mind hung in
the balance here.
   “Guthwulf,” the king began, and his voice sounded bowed as though
beneath a great weight, “do not think to provoke me today . . . but neither
think that you can cow me. The king has shown no tolerance for the
troubles of the Hernystiri at all. We have weathered a bitter drought, and
now the rains for which we thanked all the gods a thousand times have
themselves become a curse. What penalty that Elias can threaten me with
can exceed that of seeing my people frightened, our cattle starving? I can
pay no greater tithe.”
   The Earl of Utanyeat stood silently for a moment, and the blankness of
his expression slowly hardened into something that to Maegwin looked
unsettlingly like jubilation.
   “No greater penalty?” the Earl said, savoring each word as though it felt
good on his tongue. “No greater tithe?” He spat a wad of citril juice on the
ground before the king’s chair. Several of Lluth’s men-at-arms actually
cried out in horror; the harper who had been quietly playing in the corner
dropped his instrument with a discordant crash.
   “Dog!” Gwythinn leaped up, his stool clattering away. In a flashing
moment his sword was out and at Guthwulf’s throat. The earl only stared,
his chin tipped ever so slightly back.
   “Gwythinn!” Lluth barked, “Sheathe, damn you, sheathe!”
   Guthwulf’s lip curled. “Let him. Go ahead, pup, kill the High King’s
Hand unarmed!” There was a clanking by the door as some of his men, their
astonishment thawing, started to move forward. Guthwulf’s hand shot up.
“No! Even if this whelp should slit my weasand from ear to ear, no one
shall strike back! You walk out and ride to Erkynland. King Elias will
be . . . most interested.” His men, confused, stood in place like armored
scarecrows.
   “Let him go, Gwythinn,” Lluth said, cold anger in his voice. The prince,
face flushed, glared at the Erkynlander for a long moment, then dropped his
blade back to his side. Guthwulf passed a finger over the tiny cut on throat
and gazed coolly at his own blood. Maegwin realized she had been holding
her breath; at the sight of the crimson smear on the Earl’s fingertip, she let it
whistle out again.
   “You will live to tell Elias yourself, Utanyeat.” Only a slight tremor
disturbed the evenness of the king’s tone. “I hope you will tell him as well
the mortal insult you have paid to the House of Hern, an insult that would
have gained your death had you not been Elias’ emissary and King’s Hand.
Go.”
   Guthwulf turned and walked to where his men stood, wild-eyed. When
he reached them he pivoted on one heel, facing Lluth across the expanse of
the great hall.
   “Remember that you could think of no greater tithe you could pay,” he
said, “if someday you hear fire in the beams of the Taig, and your children
crying.” He strode heavily through the door.
   Maegwin, her hands shaking, bent and picked up a piece of the shattered
harp, and wound its curling string around her hand. She raised her head to
look at her father and brother; what she saw there made her turn back again
to the shard of wood in her palm, and the string pulled tight against her
white skin.




   Breathing a soft Wrannaman curse, Tiamak stared disconsolately at the
empty cage of reeds. It was his third trap, and there had not been a crab yet.
The fishhead that had baited it was, of course, gone without trace. Glaring
down into the muddy water, he had a sudden nervous premonition that the
crabs were somehow a step ahead of him—were perhaps even now waiting
for him to drop the cage down lardered with another pop-eyed head. He
could picture a whole tribe of them scuttling over with expressions of glee
to poke the bait out through the bars with a stick or some other such tool
recently granted to crab-kind by some beneficent crustacean deity.
   Did the crabs worship him as a soft-shelled providing angel, he
wondered, or did they look up at him with the cynical indifference of a gang
of ne’er-do-wells taking the measure of a drunkard before relieving him of
his purse?
   He felt sure it was the latter. He rebaited the carefully woven cage and,
with a soft sigh, let it splash down into the water, uncoiling its rope behind
as it sank.
   The sun was just slipping below the horizon, washing the long sky above
the marsh in shades of orange and persimmon-red. As Tiamak poled his
flatboat through the Wran’s waterways—distinguishable in places from the
land only by the lesser height of the vegetation—he had a sinking feeling
that today’s ill luck was only the beginning of a long rising tide. He had
broken his best bowl that morning, the one that he had spent two days
writing Roahog the Potter’s ancestor-list to pay for; in the afternoon he had
shattered a pen nib and spattered a great gobbet of berry-juice ink across his
manuscript, ruining an almost completed page. And now, unless the crabs
had decided to hold some kind of festival in the cramped confines of his last
trap, there was going to be precious little to eat tonight. He was growing so
very tired of root soup and rice biscuits.
   As he silently approached the last float, a latticework ball of reeds, he
offered an unspoken prayer to He Who Always Steps on Sand that even
now the little bottom-walkers were pushing and shoving their way into the
cage below. Because of his unusual education, which included a year living
on Perdruin—unheard of for a Wrannaman—Tiamak did not really believe
in He Who Steps on Sand anymore, but he still held a fondness for him,
such as might be felt for a senile grandfather who often tumbled down from
the house, but once brought nuts and carved toys. Besides, it never hurt to
pray, even if one did not believe in the object of prayer. It helped to
compose the mind, and, at the very least, it impressed others.
   The trap came up slowly, and for a moment Tiamak’s heart sped a little
in his thin brown chest, as if seeking to drown out the expectant noises of
his stomach. But the sensation of resistance was short-lived, probably some
clinging root which had held and then slipped away, and the cage suddenly
popped up and bobbed on the water’s cloudy surface. Something was
moving inside; he lifted the cage up, interposing it between himself and the
sunset-glaring sky, squinting. Two tiny, stalked eyes goggled back at him,
eyes that wobbled atop a crab that would disappear in his palm if he folded
his fingers over it.
   Tiamak snorted. He could imagine what had happened here: the older,
rowdier crab-brothers goading the littlest into assaying the trap; the young-
ling, caught inside, weeping while his crude brothers laughed and waved
their claws. Then the giant shadow of Tiamak, the cage suddenly tugged
upward, the crab-brothers staring abashedly at each other, wondering how
they would explain Baby’s absence to Mother.
   Still, Tiamak thought, considering the hollowish feeling in his middle, if
this was all he had to show for today . . . it was small, but it would go nicely
in the soup.
   He squinted into the cage again, then upended it, shaking the prisoner out
onto his palm. Why delude himself? This was a run-on-the-sandbar day, and
that was that.
  The crablet made a plopping noise as he dropped it back into the water.
He did not even bother to resink the trap.

                                    •••

   As he climbed the long ladder from his moored boat to the little house
perched in the banyan tree, Tiamak vowed to be content with soup and a
biscuit. Gluttony was an obstacle, he reminded himself, an impediment
between the soul and the realms of truth. As he reeled the ladder up onto the
porch he thought of She Who Birthed Mankind, who had not even had a
nice bowl of root soup, but had subsisted entirely on rocks and dirt and
swamp water until they combined in her stomach and she whelped a litter of
clay men, the first humans.
   There, that made root soup a real bargain, didn’t it? Besides, he had
much work to do anyway—repair or rewrite the blotched manuscript page,
for one thing. Among his tribesmen he was thought of as merely strange,
but somewhere out in the world there would be people who would read his
revision of Sovran Remedys of the Wranna Healers and realize that there
were minds of true learning in the marshes. But ay! a crab would have gone
down smartly—that and a jug of fern beer.
   As Tiamak washed his hands in the water bowl he had put out before
leaving, crouching because there was no room to sit between his
obsessively scraped and polished writing board and his water jug, he heard
a scratching sound on the roof. He listened carefully as he wiped his hands
dry on his waistcloth. It came again: a dry rustle, like his broken pen being
rubbed across the thatching.
   It took him only a moment to slide out the window and climb hand over
hand onto the sloping roof. Grasping one of the banyan’s long, curving
limbs he made his way up to where a little bark-roofed box sat atop the roof
peak, an infant house carried on its mother’s back. He ducked his head into
the box’s open end.
   It was there, right enough: a gray sparrow, pecking briskly at the seeds
that were scattered across the floor. Tiamak reached in a gentle hand to
enfold it; then, as carefully as he could, he climbed down the roof and slid
in through the window.
   He put the sparrow in the crab cage he kept hanging from the roofbeam
for just such occasions, and quickly made a fire. When the flames began to
lick up from the stone hearth, he removed the bird from the cage, his eyes
smarting as the smoke began to coil toward the hole in the ceiling.
   The sparrow had lost a feather or two from its tail, and held one wing out
a bit from its side, as though it had come through some scrapes on its way
down from Erkynland. He knew it had come from Erkynland because it was
the only sparrow he had ever raised. His other birds were marsh doves, but
Morgenes insisted on sparrows for some reason—funny old man, he was.
   After he had set a pot of water on the flames, Tiamak did what he could
for the awkward silver wing, then put down more seeds and a hollow curl of
bark full of water. He was tempted to wait until he had eaten to read the
message, to hold off the pleasure of faraway news as long as possible, but
on a day like this one had been, such patience was too much to expect of
himself. He mashed some rice flour up in the mortar, added some pepper
and water, then spread the mixture out and rolled it into a cake which he set
on the fire stone to bake.
   The slip of parchment that had been wrapped around the sparrow’s leg
was ragged at the edges, and the printed characters were smeared, as though
the bird had gotten more than a little wet, but he was used to such things
and soon sorted it out. The notation signifying the date when it had been
written surprised him: the gray sparrow had taken nearly a month to reach
the Wran. The message surprised him even more, but it was not the kind of
surprise he had been hoping for.
   It was with a feeling of cold weight in his stomach superseding any
hunger that he went to the window, looking out past the tangled banyan
branches to the fast-blooming stars. He stared into the northern sky, and for
a moment could almost believe he felt a cold wind knifing in, driving a
wedge of chill through the warm air of the Wran. He was a long time at the
window before he noticed the smell of his supper burning.




   Count Eolair sat back in the deep-cushioned chair and looked up at the
high ceiling. It was covered in religious paintings, painstaking renditions of
Usires healing the washerwoman, Sutrin martyred in the arena of the
Imperator Crexis, and other such subjects. The colors seemed to be fading
somewhat, and many of the pictures were obscured by dust, as though
draped in a fine veil. Still, it was an impressive sight, for all that this was
one of the smaller antechambers of the Sancellan Aedonitis.
   A millionweight of sandstone, marble, and gold, Eolair thought, and all
for a monument to something no one has ever seen.
   Unbidden, a wave of homesickness washed over him, as had often
happened in this last week. What he would not give to be back in his
humble hall in Nad Mullach, surrounded by nieces and nephews and the
small monuments of his own people and gods, or at the Taig in
Hernysadharc, where a bit of his secret heart always lingered, instead of
surrounded here by the land-devouring stone of Nabban! But the scent of
war was on the wind, and he could not lock himself away when his king
had asked his help. Still, he was weary of traveling. The grass of Hernystir
would feel fine beneath his horse’s hooves again.
   “Count Eolair! Forgive me, please, for keeping you waiting.” Father
Dinivan, the lector’s young secretary, stood in the far doorway wiping his
hands on his black robe. “Today has been a full one already, and we have
not reached the forenoon. Still,” he laughed, “that is a terribly poor excuse.
Please, come into my chambers!”
   Eolair followed him out of the antechamber, his boots silent on the old,
thick carpets.

                                     •••

   “There,” said Dinivan, grinning and warming his hands before the fire,
“is that better? It is a scandal, but we cannot keep the Lord’s greatest house
warm. The ceilings are too high. And it has been such a cold spring!”
   The count smiled. “Truth to tell, I had not much noticed it. In Hernystir
we sleep with our windows open, except in direst winter. We are a people
who live out-of-doors.”
   Dinivan wagged his eyebrows. “And we Nabbanai are soft southerners,
eh?”
   “I did not say that!” Eolair laughed. “One thing you southerners are, you
are masters of clever speech.”
    Dinivan sat down in a hard-backed chair. “Ah, but his Sacredness the
lector—who is an Erkynlandish man originally, as you well know—the
lector can talk circles around any of us. He is a wise and subtle man.”
    “That I know. And it is about him I would speak, Father.”
    “Call me Dinivan, please. Ah, it is ever the fate of a great man’s
secretary—to be sought out for one’s proximity rather than one’s
personality.” He made a mock-downcast face.
    Eolair again found himself liking this priest very much. “Such indeed is
your doom, Dinivan. Now hear, please. I suppose you know why my master
has sent me here?”
    “I would have to be a clod indeed not to know. These are times that set
tongues wagging like the tails of excited dogs. Your master reaches out to
Leobardis, that they can make some sort of common cause.”
    “Indeed.” Eolair stepped away from the fire to draw up a chair near
Dinivan’s. “We are delicately balanced: my Lluth, your Lector Ranessin,
Elias the High King, Duke Leobardis . . .”
    “And Prince Josua, if he lives,” Dinivan said, and his face was worried.
“Yes, a delicate balance. And you know that the lector can do nothing to
upset that balance.”
    Eolair nodded slowly. “I know.”
    “So why have you come to me?” Dinivan asked kindly.
    “I am not quite sure. Only this I would tell you: it seems there is some
struggle brewing, as often happens, but I myself fear it is deeper. You might
think me a madman, but I forebode that an age is ending, and I fear what
the coming one may bring.”
    The lector’s secretary stared. For a moment his plain face seemed far
older, as though he reflected on sorrows long carried.
    “I will say only that I share your fears, Count Eolair,” he said at last.
“But I cannot speak for the lector, except to say as I did before: he is a wise
and subtle man.” He stroked the Tree at his breast. “For your hearts-ease,
though, I can say this: Duke Leobardis has not yet made up his mind where
he will lend his support. Although the High King alternately flatters and
threatens him, still Leobardis resists.”
    “Well, this is good news,” said Eolair, and smiled warily. “When I saw
the duke this morning he was very distant, as though he feared to be seen
listening to me too closely.”
   “He has many things to weigh, as does my own master,” Dinivan replied.
“But know this, too—and it is a deep secret. Just this morning I took Baron
Devasalles in to see Lector Ranessin. The baron is about to set forth on an
embassy that will mean much to both Leobardis and my master, and will
have much to do with which way Nabban throws her might in any conflict.
I can tell you no more than that, but I hope it is something.”
   “It is more than a little,” Eolair said. “I thank you for your trust,
Dinivan.”
   Somewhere in the Sancellan Aedonitis a bell rang, deep and low.
   “The Clavean Bell calls out the noon hour,” Father Dinivan said. “Come,
let us find us something to eat and a jug of beer, and talk about more
pleasant things.” A smile chased across his features, making him young
again. “Did you know I traveled once in Hernystir? Your country is
beautiful, Eolair.”
   “Although somewhat lacking in stone buildings,” the count replied,
patting the wall of Dinivan’s chamber.
   “And that is one of its beauties,” the priest laughed, leading him out the
door.




   The old man’s beard was white, and long enough that he tucked it into
his belt when he walked—which, until this morning, he had been doing for
several days. His hair was no darker than his beard. Even his hooded jacket
and leggings were made from the thick pelt of a white wolf. The creature’s
skin had been carefully flayed; the forelegs crossed on his chest, and its
jawless head, nailed to a cap of iron, sat upon his own brow. Had it not been
for the bits of red crystal in the wolf’s empty sockets, and the old man’s
fierce blue eyes beneath them, he would have been nothing but another
patch of white in the snow-covered forest that lay between Drorshull Lake
and the hills.
   The moaning of the wind in the treetops increased, and a spatter of snow
dropped from the branches of the tall pine tree onto the man crouching
below. He shook himself impatiently, like an animal, and a fine mist rose
around him, momentarily breaking the weak sunlight into a fog of tiny
rainbows. The wind continued its keening song, and the old man in white
reached to his side, grasping something that at first appeared to be only
another lump of white—a snow-covered stone or tree stump. He held it up,
brushing the powdery whiteness from its top and sides, then lifted away the
cloth cover just far enough to peer inside.
   He whispered into the opening and waited, then knitted his brows for an
instant as if annoyed or troubled. Setting the object down, he stood up and
unbuckled the belt of bleached reindeer hide from around his waist. After
first pulling the hood back from his lean, weather-hardened face, he
stripped off the wolfskin coat. The sleeveless shirt he wore beneath was the
same color as the jacket, the skin of his sinewy arms not much darker, but
starting on his right wrist just above the fur gauntlet the head of a snake was
drawn in bright inks, scribed in blue and black and blood-red directly on the
skin. The body of the snake curved round and round the old man’s right arm
in a spiral, disappearing into the shoulder of his shirt to reappear writhing
sinuously about his left arm and terminate in a curlicued tail at the wrist.
This fierce splash of color leaped out against the dull winter forest and the
man’s white garb and skin; from a short distance it appeared that some
flying serpent, halved in midair, was suffering its death agonies two cubits
above the frozen earth.
   The old man paid no attention to the gooseflesh on his arms until he had
finished draping his jacket over the bundle, tucking the loose folds in
beneath it. Then he pulled a leather bag from a pouch in his undershirt,
squeezed from it a quantity of yellow grease, and briskly rubbed it over his
exposed skin, causing the serpent to gleam as though newly-arrived from
some humid southern jungle. The task over, he crouched back again on his
heels to wait. He was hungry, but he had finished the last of his traveling
rations the night before. That was of no importance, anyway, because soon
the ones he waited for would come, and then there would be food.
   Chin tilted down, cobalt eyes smoldering beneath his icy brows, Jarnauga
watched the southern approaches. He was an old, old man, and the rigors of
time and weather had made him hard and spare. In a way he looked forward
to the hour that was coming soon, when Death called for him and took him
to her dark, quiet hall. Silence and solitude held no terror; they had been the
warp and weft of his long life. He wanted only to finish the task that had
been set before him, to hand on a torch that others might use in the darkness
ahead; then he would let life and body go as easily as he shrugged the snow
from his bare shoulders.
   Thinking of the solemn halls that waited at the final turn of his road, he
remembered his beloved Tungoldyr, left behind him a fortnight ago. As he
had stood upon his doorstep that last day, the little town where he had spent
most of his four and a half score of years had stretched before him, as
empty as the legendary Huelheim that awaited him when his work was
done. All of Tungoldyr’s other inhabitants had fled months before; only
Jarnauga remained in the village called Moon Door, perched among the
high Himilfell Mountains, but still in the shadow of distant Sturmrspeik—
the Stormspike. The winter had hardened into a cold that even the
Rimmersmen of Tungoldyr had never known before, and the nighttime
songs of the winds had changed into something that had the sound of
howling and weeping in it, until men went mad and were found laughing in
the morning, their families dead around them.
   Only Jarnauga had remained in his small house as the ice mists became
thick as wool in the mountain passes and the narrow streets of the town,
Tungoldyr’s sloping roofs seeming to float like the ships of ghost warriors
sailing the clouds. No one but Jarnauga had been around to see the
flickering lights of Stormspike burn brighter and brighter, to hear the
sounds of vast, harsh music that wound in and out through the din of
thunder, playing across the mountains and valleys of this northernmost
province of Rimmersgard.
   But now even he—his time come around at last, as made known to him
by certain signs and messages—had left Tungoldyr to the creeping darkness
and cold. Jarnauga knew that no matter what happened, he would never
again see the sun on the wooden houses, or listen to the singing of the
mountain rills as they splashed past his front door, down to the swelling
Gratuvask. Neither would he stand on his porch in the clear, dark spring
nights and see the lights in the sky—the shimmering northern lights that
had been there since his boyhood, not the guttering, sickly flares now
playing about the dark face of Stormspike. Such things were gone, now. His
road ahead was plain, but there was little joy in it.
   But not everything was clear, even now. There was still the nagging
dream to be dealt with, the dream of the black book and the three swords. It
had dogged his sleep for a fortnight, but its meaning was still hidden from
him.
   His thoughts were interrupted by a blotch of movement on the southern
approach, far away along the rim of the trees dotting the Wealdhelm’s
western skirts. He squinted briefly, then slowly nodded his head and rose to
his feet.
   As he was pulling his coat back on, the wind changed direction; a
moment later a dim mutter of thunder rolled down from the north. It came
again, a low growl like a beast struggling awake from sleep. On its heels,
but from the opposite direction, the sound of hooves grew from a murmur
to a noise that rivaled the thunder.
   As Jarnauga picked up his cage of birds and walked out to meet the
riders, the sounds grew together—thunder tolling in the north, the muffled
din of approaching horsemen to the south—until they filled the white forest
with their cold rumble, like music made on drums of ice.