
                        A Thousand Nails




Somebody was breaking down the door with axes—hacking,
chopping, splintering away the shielding timber.
   “Doctor!” Simon shouted, sitting up, “it’s the soldiers! The soldiers have
come!”
   But he was not in Morgenes’ chambers. He was wrapped in sweat-
drenched sheets, on a small bed in a small, neat room. The sound of blades
splitting wood continued; a moment later the door swung inward, and the
din rose in volume. An unfamiliar face peered around the edge, pale and
long of chin, topped with a sparse crest of hair that gleamed as coppery red
as Simon’s own in the framing sunlight. His one visible eye was blue. The
other was covered by a black patch.
   “Ah!” the stranger said, “you’re awake, then. Good.” He was an
Erkynlander by his accent, with a touch of the northern heaviness. He
closed the door behind him, cutting off some of the noise of the work
outside. He wore a long gray priestly cassock that hung limply on his slight
frame.
   “I’m Father Strangyeard.” He settled into a high-backed chair beside
Simon; other than the bed and a low table covered with parchment and odds
and ends, it was the only furniture in the room. When he was comfortable,
the stranger leaned forward and patted Simon’s hand.
   “How are you feeling? Better, I hope?”
   “Yes . . . yes, I suppose so,” Simon looked around. “Where am I?”
   “Naglimund, but you knew that, of course.” Father Strangyeard smiled.
“More specifically, you are in my room . . . my bed, too.” He lifted a hand.
“I hope you found it comfortable. It is not very well-appointed—but,
goodness, how foolish of me! You have been sleeping in the forest, haven’t
you?” The priest gave another quick, hesitant smile. “It must be better than
the forest, hmmm?”
   Simon swung his feet to the cold floor, relieved to find that he was
wearing breeches, a little unsettled to see that they weren’t his own. “Where
are my friends?” A dark thought came up like a cloud. “Binabik . . . is he
dead?”
   Strangyeard pursed his lips, as though Simon had uttered a mild
blasphemy. “Dead? Praise Usires, no—although he is not well, not well at
all.”
   “May I see him?” Simon slid down to the flags to look for his boots.
“Where is he? And how is Marya?”
   “Marya?” the priest’s expression was puzzled as he watched Simon crawl
about the floor. “Ah. Your other companion is fine. You will eventually see
her as well, I do not doubt.”
   The boots were under the writing table. As Simon pulled them on Father
Strangyeard reached around and lifted a clean white blouse from the back
of the chair.
   “Here,” he said. “My, you are in a hurry. Would you like to see your
friend first, or have something to eat?”
   Simon was already tying the front of the shirt closed. “Binabik and
Marya, then eat food,” he grunted, concentrating. “And Qantaqa, too.”
   “Hard as times have been of late,” the father said in a tone of reproof,
“we never eat wolves at Naglimund. I assume you are counting her as a
friend.”
   Looking up, Simon saw that the one-eyed man was making a joke.
   “Yes,” Simon said, feeling suddenly shy. “A friend.”
   “Then let us go,” the priest said, standing. “I was told to make sure you
were well provided for, so the sooner I get food into you, the better I will
have fulfilled my commission.” He opened the door, admitting another
flood of sunshine and noise.
   Simon blinked in the strong light, looking up at the high walls of the
keep and the vast purple and brown expanse of the Wealdhelm looming
above, dwarfing the gray-clad sentries. A congregation of angular stone
buildings bulked large at the keep’s center, arranged without any of the
Hayholt’s eccentric beauty, its contrast of styles and eras. The dark smoke-
streaked cubes of sandstone, the small lightless windows and heavy doors,
looked as if they had been constructed for one purpose only: to keep
something out.
   Just a stone’s throw away, in the midst of the swarming commons yard, a
crew of shirtless men were splitting a stack of logs, adding to a pile of
timbers already as high as their heads.
   “So that’s what that chopping was,” Simon said, watching the axes flash
and fall. “What are they doing?”
   Father Strangyeard turned to follow his glance. “Ah. Ah. Building a
pyre, they are. Going to burn the Hunë—the giant.”
   “The giant?” It came back in a rush: the snarling, leathery face, the arms
of impossible length lashing out at him. “It isn’t dead?”
   “Oh, quite dead, yes.” Strangyeard began walking toward the main
buildings. Simon fell in behind, sneaking a last look back at the growing
stack of spars. “You see, Simon, some of Josua’s men wanted to make a
show of it, you understand, cut its head off, mount it on the gate, that sort of
thing. The prince said no. He said that it was an evil thing, but it was no
animal. They wear clothes of a sort, did you know? Carry clubs, as well,
cudgels really. Well, Josua said he’d mount no enemy’s head for sport. Said
burn it.” Strangyeard tugged at his ear. “So, they’re going to burn it.”
   “Tonight?” Simon had to stretch to keep up with the priest’s long strides.
   “Just as soon as the pyre is finished. Prince Josua doesn’t want any more
made of it than has to be. I’m sure he’d just as lief bury it in the hills, but
the people want to see it dead.” Father Strangyeard quickly sketched the
sign of the Tree on his breast. “It’s the third one come down from the north
this month, you see. One of the others killed the bishop’s brother. It’s all
been most unnatural.”

                                     •••

  Binabik was in a small room off the chapel, which stood in the center
courtyard of the main keep buildings. He looked very pale, and smaller than
Simon expected, as though some of the substance had drained from him,
but his smile was cheerful.
    “Friend Simon,” he said, sitting up carefully. His small brown torso was
swathed in bandages to the collarbone. Simon resisted the urge to pick the
little man up and hug him, not wanting to open the healing wounds. Instead
he sat on the edge of the pallet and clasped one of Binabik’s warm hands.
    “I thought you were lost,” Simon said, tongue thick in his mouth.
    “As I did, when the arrow struck at me,” the troll said with a rueful shake
of the head. “But apparently nothing of a serious nature was pierced. I have
been given good care, and but for a soreness of movement I am nearly
new.” He turned to the priest. “I walked upon the yard today.”
    “Good, very good.” Father Strangyeard smiled absently, fiddling with the
string that held his eye patch in place. “Well, I must be going. I’m sure there
are many things you companions wish to discuss.” He sidled for the door.
“Simon, please use my room as long as you like. I am sharing Brother
Eglaf’s room for the nonce. He makes terrible noises when he sleeps, but he
is a good man to take me in.”
    Simon thanked him. After a last wish for Binabik’s continued return to
strength, he went out.
    “He is a man of very good mind, Simon,” Binabik said as they listened to
the priest’s footsteps fade down the corridor. “Master of the castle archives,
he is. We have already had fine conversing.”
    “He’s a little strange, isn’t he? Sort of . . . distracted?”
    Binabik laughed, then winced and coughed. Simon leaned forward,
apprehensive, but the troll waved him back. “A moment, only,” he said.
When he had his breath back, he continued. “Some types of men, Simon,
whose minds are very full of thoughts, they are forgetting to speak and act
like normal men.”
    Simon nodded, looking around at the room. It was much like
Strangyeard’s: spare, small, with whitewashed walls. Instead of the piles of
books and parchment, the writing table bore only a copy of the Book of the
Aedon, a red ribbon like a slender tongue keeping the place where the last
reader had stopped.
    ‘Do you know where Marya is?’ he asked.
    “No.” Binabik looked extremely serious. Simon wondered why. “I expect
she gave her message to Josua. Perhaps he sent her back to wherever the
princess is, for relaying of a return answer.”
   “No!” Simon did not like that idea at all. “How could all that have
happened so fast?”
   “So fast?” Binabik smiled. “This is the morning of the second day we
have been in Naglimund.”
   Simon was astonished. “How can that be?! I just woke up!”
   Binabik shook his head, sliding back down into the sheets as he did so.
“Not so. You slept through most of yesterday, waking only to take some
water, then sleeping again. I would suppose it was the last part of the trip
weakening you, on top of your fever from when we rode the river.”
   “Usires!” He felt as though his body had betrayed him. “And Marya’s
been sent away?”
   Binabik raised a placating hand from beneath the sheets. “I have no such
knowledge. That was guess, only. Just as likely she is here somewhere—
perhaps staying with some of the womenfolk, or in the quarter of servants.
She is, for all said, a servant.”
   Simon glowered. Binabik gently took back the hand the boy had tugged
free in his agitation. “Be of patience, Simon-friend,” the troll said. “You
have done a hero’s work to be reaching so far. Who knows what may
happen next?”
   “You are right . . . I suppose . . .” He took a deep breath.
   “And you have saved my life,” Binabik pointed out.
   “Is that important?” Simon distractedly patted the small hand and stood
up. “You have saved mine as well, several times. Friends are friends.”
   Binabik smiled, but his eyes showed weariness. “Friends are friends,” he
agreed. “Speaking of those things, I must sleep again now. There will be
important doings in the days ahead. Will you look on Qantaqa, and how she
is being kept? Strangyeard was supposed to be fetching her to me, but I am
afraid it has slipped from his busy head like down from a”—he plumped his
—“a pillow.”
   “Certainly,” Simon said, pulling open the door. “Do you know where she
is?”
   “Strangyeard said . . . the stables . . .” Binabik responded, yawning.
Simon let himself out.
   As he emerged into the central courtyard, stopping to watch the people
passing by, courtiers and servants and clerics, none of them paying him the
slightest attention, he was struck by a twofold revelation.
   First of all, he had no idea where the stables might be. Second, he was
very, very hungry. Father Strangyeard had said something about being
sworn to see him provided for, but the priest had wandered off. He was a
daft old bird!
   Suddenly he saw a familiar face across the courtyard. He had already
taken several steps before he remembered the name that went with it.
   “Sangfugol!” he called, and the harper stopped, looking around to find
who had called him. He saw Simon running toward him and shaded his
eyes, continuing to look puzzled even as the youth slid to a stop before him.
   “Yes?” he said. He was dressed in a rich doublet of lavender, and his
dark hair hung gracefully from beneath a matching feathered cap. Even in
his clean clothes, Simon felt shabby standing before the politely-smiling
musician. “Do you have some message for me?”
   “I’m Simon. You probably don’t remember . . . you spoke to me at the
funeral feast at the Hayholt.”
   Sangfugol stared at him a moment longer, frowning slightly, then his face
lightened. “Simon! Aha, of course! The well-spoken bottle boy. I am truly
sorry, I didn’t recognize you at all. You have grown a great deal.”
   “I have?”
   The harper grinned. “I should say! You certainly didn’t have this fuzz on
your face when I saw you last.” He reached out and cupped Simon’s chin.
“Or at least I don’t remember any.”
   “Fuzz?” Wonderingly, Simon reached his hand up and felt his cheek. It
did seem furry . . . but soft, like the hair on the back of his arms.
   Sangfugol quirked his lips and laughed. “How could you not know?
When I first got my mannish beard, I was at my mother’s glass every day to
see how it was coming in.” He raised a hand to his clean-shaven jaw. “Now
I am cutting it off with curses every morning, to keep my face soft for the
ladies.”
   Simon felt himself blushing. He must seem such a rustic! “I have been
away from looking glasses for a while.”
   “Hmmm.” Sangfugol looked him up and down. “Taller too, if my
memory serves. What brings you to Naglimund? Not that I can’t guess.
There are many here who have fled the Hayholt, my master Prince Josua
not least of them.”
   “I know,” Simon said. He felt the need to say something that would bring
him back to some kind of parity with the well-dressed young man. “I helped
him escape.”
   The harper raised an eyebrow. “True? Well, this sounds an interesting
tale, indeed! Have you eaten yet? Or would you like to find some wine? I
know the hour is early, but truth to tell, I have not yet been to bed . . . to
sleep.”
   “Food would be splendid,” Simon said, “but first I must do something.
Can you show me where the stables are?”
   Sangfugol smiled. “What now, young hero? Will you ride down to
Erchester to bring Pryrates’ head to us in a sack?” Simon blushed again but
this time with no little pleasure. “Come,” the harper said, “stables, then
food.”

                                    •••

   The bent, sour-faced man pitchforking hay seemed suspicious when
Simon asked after Qantaqa’s whereabouts.
   “Here, what do you want with him?” the man asked, then shook his head.
“Fair vicious he is. Not right to put him in here. I shouldn’t have to, but
that’s what the prince said. Almost took my hand off, that beast did.”
   “Well, then,” Simon said, “you should be glad to be rid of her. Take me
to her.”
   “That’s a devil-beast, I tell you,” the man said. They followed his
limping progress all the way through the dark stables and out the back door
to a muddy yard nestled in the shadow of the wall.
   “Bring the cows here for slaughter, sometimes,” the man said, pointing to
a square pit. “Don’t know why the prince brought this one back alive for
poor old Lucuman to mind. Should have put a spear right in the evil
bastard, like that giant.”
   Simon gave the bent man a look of disgust, then strode forward to the
edge of the pit. A rope staked to the ground at the edge trailed down into the
hole. It was knotted around the neck of the wolf, who lay on her side at the
pit’s muddy bottom.
   Simon was shocked. “What have you done to her!?” he shouted, turning
on the stablekeeper. Sangfugol, treading the soggy yard more carefully,
came up behind.
   The old man’s suspicion turned to peevishness. “Didn’t do nothing,” he
said resentfully, “Proper devil he is—howled and howled like a fiend. Tried
to bite me, too.”
   “So would I,” Simon snapped. “As a matter of fact, I still might. Bring
her out of there.”
   “How, then?” the man asked, disquieted. “Just pull on the rope? He’s too
big by half.”
   “She, you idiot.” Simon was full of rage to see the wolf—his companion
of uncounted miles—lying in a dark, runny hole. He leaned over.
   “Qantaqa,” he called. “Ho, Qantaqa!” She flicked her ears, as though to
dislodge a fly, but did not open her eyes. Simon looked around the yard
until he saw what he needed: the chopping block, a scarred log stump as big
as a man’s chest. He wrestled it to the pit while the stableman and the
harper looked on in puzzlement.
   “Watch now,” he called down to the wolf, then rolled the stump over the
edge; it thumped into the soft earth only a cubit from the wolf’s hind legs.
She lifted her head briefly to look, than lay back.
   Simon again peered over the edge of the pit, trying to coax Qantaqa up,
but she paid him no heed.
   “Be careful, for pity’s sake,” Sangfugol said.
   “He’s lucky that beast’s a-resting now,” the other man said, sagely
chewing on his thumbnail. “Should of heard him afore, howling and all.”
   Simon swung his feet over the rim of the hole and slid down, landing in
the squelching, slippery mud below.
   “What are you doing?!” Sangfugol cried. “Are you mad?”
   Simon crouched beside the wolf, and slowly reached his hand forward.
She growled at him, but he held his fingers out. Her muddy nose snuffled
briefly, then she carefully extended her long tongue and licked the back of
his hand. Simon applied himself to scratching her ears, then felt her for cuts
or broken bones. None were apparent. He turned and sat the chopping log
upright, digging it into the mud beside the pit wall, then went back to
Qantaqa. He put his arms around the width of her trunk and coerced her into
standing upright.
   “He’s mad, isn’t he?” the sour-faced man half-whispered to Sangfugol.
   “Close your mouth,” Simon growled, looking at his clean boots and
clothing already smeared with mud. “Grab the rope and pull when I say
pull. Sangfugol, cut his head off if he dallies.”
   “Here, now,” the man said reproachfully, but clutched the rope. The
harper took up a position behind him to help. Simon urged Qantaqa toward
the stump, at last persuading her to put her forelegs up on it. Simon lowered
his shoulder to her wide, fur-fringed hindquarters.
   “Ready? Haul away!” he cried. The rope went taut. Qantaqa fought it at
first, pulling away from the straining men, dropping her considerable
weight back on Simon, whose feet were slipping in the ooze. Just as he
thought he could feel himself sliding under, to be crushed to death in a mud
pit beneath a large wolf, Qantaqa relented and went with the tug of the rope.
Simon did slide, then, but had the satisfaction of seeing the wolf scramble
kicking over the side of the pit. There was a whoop of surprise and
consternation from the stablekeeper and Sangfugol as her yellow-eyed head
breached the rim.
   Simon used the block himself to climb out. The stable man was cowering
in terror before the wolf, who regarded him balefully. Sangfugol, looking
more than a little alarmed himself, was cautiously sliding away from her on
his rump, for the moment uncaring of the damage to his fine garments.
   Simon laughed and helped the harper to his feet. “Come with me,” he
said. “We will deliver Qantaqa to her friend and master, who you should
meet anyway—then perhaps that food we talked of?”
   Sangfugol slowly nodded his head. “Now that I have seen Simon,
Companion of Wolves, some of the other things are easier to credit. Let us
go, by all means.”
   Qantaqa nudged the prostrate stablekeeper one last time, eliciting a
whimper of fright. Simon untied her rope from the stake and they set out
across the stable, leaving four pairs of muddy footprints behind them.

                                    •••

   While Binabik and Qantaqa had their reunion, moderated by Simon in
order to protect the still-weak troll from his mount’s dangerous exuberance,
Sangfugol slipped off to the kitchens. He returned a short while later with a
jar of beer, a goodly quantity of mutton, cheese and bread wrapped in a
cloth; he was also—Simon was surprised to see—still wearing the same
mud-spattered clothes.
   “The south battlement, where we’re going, is quite dusty,” the harper
explained. “I’m damned if I’m going to ruin another doublet.”
   As they headed for the keep’s main gate, and the steep staircase up to the
battlements, Simon commented on the great number of people who milled
about the commons yard, and the tents and lean-tos that dotted the open
spaces.
   “Come for refuge, many of them,” Sangfugol said. “Most are off the
Frostmarch and out of the Greenwade river valley. Some also from
Utanyeat who’ve found Earl Guthwulf’s hand a little too heavy, but mostly
they’re folk who’ve been driven from their land by weather or bandits. Or
other things—like the Hunën.” He gestured to the completed pyre as they
passed. The woodsmen had gone away; the stack of lumber stood mute and
significant as a ruined church.
   Atop the battlements they settled down on rough-hewn stone. The sun
had scaled high into the sky, beating down past the few remaining clouds.
Simon wished he had a hat.
   “Either you or someone else has brought good weather with them.”
Sangfugol opened his doublet to the warmth. “It has been the strangest
Maia weather of my memory—snow flurries on the Frostmarch, cold rains
down into Utanyeat . . . hail! We had hail a fortnight ago, icestones big as
bird’s eggs.” He began to unwrap the food as Simon took in the view.
Perched as they were atop the high walls of the inner keep, Naglimund was
spread at their feet like a blanket.
   The castle hunched in a steep-sided hollow in the Wealdhelm Hills like
something held in an upturned palm. Below the western battlements, across
from where they sat, lay the castle’s broad outer wall; beyond that the
crooked streets of Naglimund town sloped down to the outwall of the city.
Outside the wall lay a nearly limitless expanse of rocky grazing land and
low hills.
   On the far side, between the eastern battlements and the stark violet wall
of the Wealdhelm, was a long, twisting trail down from the crest of the hills.
Dotting the slopes on either side of the pathway were a thousand points of
blackly gleaming sunlight.
   “What are those?” Simon pointed. Sangfugol squinted his eyes, chewing.
   “The nails, you mean?”
   “What nails? Those long spikes on the hillside are what I’m asking
about.”
   The harper nodded. “The nails. What do you think Naglimund means,
anyway? You Hayholt-folk have forgotten your Erkynlandish. ‘Nail-fort’—
that’s what it means. Duke Aeswides put them there when he built
Naglimund.”
   “When was that? And what are they for?” Staring, Simon let the wind
take his bread crumbs and swirl them out over the outer bailey.
   “Sometime before the Rimmersmen came south, that’s all I know,”
Sangfugol answered. “But he got the steel from Rimmersgard, all those
bars. The Dvernings made them,” he added significantly, but the name
meant nothing to Simon.
   “Why, though? It’s like an iron garden.”
   “To keep the Sithi out,” Sangfugol declared. “Aeswides was terrified of
them, because this was really their land. One of their great cities, I forget
the name, was on the far side of the hills here.”
   “Da’ai Chikiza,” Simon said quietly, staring at the thicket of tarnished
metal.
   “That’s right,” the harper agreed. “And the Sithi can’t stand iron, it’s
said. Makes them quite ill, even kills them. So Aeswides surrounded his
castle with those steel ‘nails’—used to be they were all around the front of
the keep as well, but with the Sithi gone they just got in the way: made it
hard to bring wagons in on market day, things of that sort. So when King
John gave this place to Josua—to keep him and his brother apart as much as
possible, I suspect—my master took them all down except the ones there on
the slopes. I think they amuse him. He likes old things very much, the
prince my master.”
   As they shared the jug of beer, Simon related to the harp player a pared-
down version of what had happened to him since they had last met, leaving
out some of the more inexplicable things since he had no answer to the
questions the harper would surely raise. Sangfugol was impressed, but he
was most strongly affected by the tale of Josua’s rescue and Morgenes’
martyrdom.
   “Ah, that villain Elias,” he said at last, and Simon was surprised by the
look of real anger that clouded the harper’s face like a storm. “King John
should have strangled that monster at birth, or barring that, at least made
him general of the armies and let him harry the Thrithings-men—anything
but putting him on the Dragonbone Chair to be a plague to us all!”
   “But he is there,” Simon said, chewing. “Do you think he will attack us
here in Naglimund?”
   “Only God and the Devil know,” Sangfugol grinned sourly, “and the
Devil’s hedging his bets. He may not know yet that Josua is here, although
that certainly won’t last long. This keep is a strong, strong place. We have
long-dead Aeswides to thank for that, anyway. All the same, strong or no, I
can’t imagine Elias standing by for long while Josua builds power here in
the north.”
   “But I thought Prince Josua didn’t want to be king,” Simon said.
   “And he doesn’t. But Elias is not the type to understand that. Ambitious
men never believe others aren’t the same. He’s also got Pryrates whispering
words of snaky advice in his ear.”
   “But haven’t Josua and the king been enemies for years? Since long
before Pryrates came?”
   Sangfugol nodded. “There has been no shortage of trouble between them.
They loved each other once, were closer than most brothers—or so I’m told
by Josua’s older retainers. But they fell out, and then Hylissa died.”
   “Hylissa?” Simon asked.
   “Elias’ Nabbanai wife. Josua was bringing her to Elias, who was still a
prince, at war then for his father in the Thrithings. Their party was waylaid
by Thrithings raiders. Josua lost his hand trying to defend Hylissa, but to no
avail—the raiders were too many.”
   Simon let out a long breath. “So that’s how it happened!”
   “It was the death of any love between them . . . or so people say.”
   After thinking for a while on Sangfugol’s words, Simon stood and
stretched; the sore spot on his ribs gave him a warning twinge. “So what
will Prince Josua do now?” he asked.
   The harper scratched at his arm and stared down at the commons yard. “I
can’t even guess,” Sangfugol said. “Prince Josua is cautious, and slow to
action; anyway, they don’t usually call me in to discuss strategy.” He
smiled. “There is talk that important emissaries are arriving, and that
sometime within a sennight Josua will call a formal Raed.”
   “A what?”
   “Raed. It’s an old Erkynlandish term for council, more or less. People in
these parts tend to cling to the older ways. Out in the country, away from
the castle, most of them still use the old speech. A Hayholt man like
yourself would probably need a local interpreter.”
   Simon would not be distracted by talk of rustic foibles. “A council, you
said—a . . . a Raed? Would that be a council of . . . war?”
   “These days,” the musician replied, and his face was again somber, “any
council at Naglimund will be a council of war.”

                                    •••

   They walked along the battlements.
   “I’m surprised,” Sangfugol said, “that with all the services you have
rendered to my master he has not yet called you for an audience.”
   “I’ve only just got out of bed this morning,” Simon said. “Besides, he
may not even have known it was me . . . in a dark clearing, with a dying
giant and all.”
   “I suppose you’re right,” the harper said, clinging to his hat, which was
doing its best to take to the gusting winds.
   Still, Simon thought, if Marya took him the message from the princess, I
should hope she would mention her companions. I never would have
thought she was the kind of girl to just forget us.
   He had to be fair, though: what girl suddenly saved from the damp and
dangerous wilderness would not prefer to spend her time with the gentle-
folk of the castle instead of a stringy scullion?
   “You haven’t by any chance seen the girl Marya who came with us?” he
asked.
   Sangfugol shook his head. “People are coming in at the gates every day.
And not just the ones fleeing the outlying farms and villages, either. The
outriders for Prince Gwythinn of Hernystir came in last night, horses in a
lather. The prince’s party should be here this evening. Lord Ethelferth of
Tinsett has been here for a week with two hundred men. Baron Ordmaer
brought a hundred Utersall men just after. Other lords are coming in with
their musters from all around. The hunt is afoot, Simon—though the Aedon
only knows who’s hunting who.”
   They had reached the northeastern turret. Sangfugol tipped a salute to the
young soldier who was walking sentry. Beyond his gray-cloaked shoulder
rose the bulk of the Wealdhelm, the massive hills seeming close enough to
reach out and touch.
   “Busy as he is,” the harper said suddenly, “it doesn’t seem right that he
shouldn’t have seen you yet. Do you mind if I put in a word for you? I’m to
attend him at dinner tonight.”
   “I would certainly like to see him, yes. I was . . . very frightened for his
safety. And my master gave a great deal so that Josua could return here, to
his home.”
   Simon was surprised to notice a faint touch of bitterness in his own
voice. He hadn’t meant it to sound that way, but still, he had suffered to get
here, and it had been him and no other who had found Josua trussed and
hanging, like a pheasant over a cotsman’s doorway.
   The tone of the remark had not escaped Sangfugol, either; the look he
turned on Simon was compounded of sympathy and amusement.
   “I understand. I would advise, however, that you do not put it to my
prince in quite that manner. He is a proud, difficult man, Simon, but I am
sure he hasn’t forgotten you. Things have been, as you know, rather difficult
of late in these parts, almost as harrowing as your own journey.”
   Simon lifted his chin and stared out at the hills, at the strange shimmer of
the wind-ruffled trees. “I know,” he said. “If he can see me, it will be an
honor. If he cannot . . . well, that is what will be.”
   The harper grinned lazily, playful eyes drooping at the corners. “A proud
and fair speech. Come now, let me show you the Nails of Naglimund.”

                                     •••

   It was truly an astonishing sight in broad daylight. The field of shining
poles, starting within a few ells of the ditch below the eastern wall of the
castle, slanted up the slope and away for perhaps a quarter of a league, right
up to the feet of the hills. They were arranged in symmetrical rows, as
though a legion of spearmen had been buried there, leaving only their
weapons protruding above the dark soil to show how conscientiously they
stood their guard. The road that meandered down from a gaping cavern in
the hill’s western face wound back and forth between the rows as sinuously
as the track of a serpent, stopping at last before the Naglimund’s heavy
eastern gate.
   “And whatever-was-his-name did all this because he was frightened of
the Sithi?” Simon asked, bewildered by the strange, silvery-dark crop that
stretched before him. “Why not just put them at the top of the wall?”
   “Duke Aeswides was his name. He was Nabban’s governor here, and he
was breaking precedent to place his castle on Sithi lands. As to why not on
the walls, well, I suppose he feared they could find some way to get over a
single wall—or beneath, perhaps. This way they would need to go through
them. You have not seen the half, Simon—these things used to sprout on
every side!” Sangfugol swung his arm in an encompassing gesture.
   “What did the Sithi do?” Simon asked. “Did they try and attack?”
   Sangfugol frowned. “Not as I’ve ever heard. You should really ask old
Father Strangyeard about that. He’s the archivist and historian of the place.”
   Simon smiled. “I’ve met him.”
   “Interesting old scuffer, isn’t he? He told me once that when Aeswides
built this place, the Sithi called it . . . called it . . . damn! I should know
these old stories, being a balladeer. Anyway, the name they had for it meant
something like ‘Trap that Catches the Hunter’ . . . as if Aeswides had just
walled himself in or some such: that he had made his own trap.”
   “And did he? What happened to him?”
   Sangfugol shook his head, and nearly lost his hat again. “Damn me if I
know. Probably got old and died here. I don’t think the Sithi paid much
attention to him.”

                                     •••

   It took them an hour to complete the circuit. They had long ago emptied
the jar of beer Sangfugol had brought to wash down their meal, but the
harper had prudently brought a skin of wine as well, thus saving them from
a dry hike. They were laughing; the older man was teaching Simon a bawdy
song about a Nabbanai noblewoman when they reached the main gate and
the winding stairs back down to the ground. As they emerged from the
gatehouse they found themselves in a milling crowd of workmen and
soldiers; most of the latter were off duty, to judge by the disarray of their
dress. Everyone was shouting and shoving; Simon quickly found himself
crushed between a fat man and a bearded guardsman.
   “What’s happening?” he called to Sangfugol, who had been pulled a
short distance away by the movement of the crowd.
   “I’m not sure,” the other called back. “Perhaps Gwythinn of
Hernysadharc has arrived.”
   The fat man turned his red face up to Simon. “Naow, it ain’t,” he said
cheerfully. His breath stank of beer and onions. “It’s that giant, the one what
the prince has killed.” He pointed toward the pyre, which still stood naked
at the edge of the commons.
   “But I don’t see the giant,” Simon said.
   “They’re just a-fetching him,” the man said. “I just came with the others,
to make sure of seeing. My sister’s son was one of the beaters what helped
catch the devil-beast!” he added proudly.
   Now another wave of sound passed through the crowd: somebody up
front could see something, and the word was hurrying back to those who
could not. Necks were craned, and children were lifted to the shoulders of
patient, dirty-faced mothers.
   Simon looked around. Sangfugol had disappeared. He stood up on tiptoe,
and found that only a few in the throng were as tall as he. Beyond the pyre
he saw the bright silks of a tent or awning, and before it the flashing colors
of some of the castle’s courtiers, sitting on stools and talking, waving their
sleeves as they gestured, like a branch full of brilliant birds. He scanned the
faces for a glimpse of Marya—perhaps she had already found a noble lady
to attach herself to: surely it was not safe for her to go back to the princess
at the Hayholt, or wherever she was. None of the faces was hers, however,
and before he could look for her elsewhere in the assemblage a line of
armored men appeared in one of the archways of the inner wall.
   Now the crowd was murmuring in earnest, for the first half-dozen
soldiers were followed by a team of horses pulling a high wooden cart.
Simon felt a moment of hollowness in his stomach but dismissed it: was he
to go all queasy every time a wagon creaked by?
   As the wheels ground to a halt, and the soldiers gathered around to
unload the pale thing humped high on the bed of the cart, Simon caught a
glimpse of crow-black hair and white skin over where the nobles stood,
beyond the stacked timbers; when he looked closer, hoping it was Marya,
the laughing courtiers had closed in again and there was nothing to see.
    It took eight straining guardsmen to lift the pole on which the giant’s
body hung like a deer from the king’s hunting preserve, and even so they
still had to slide it from the wagon to the ground before they could get their
shoulders comfortably under the bar. The creature had been trussed at knees
and elbows; huge hands wagged in the air as its back bumped along the
ground. The crowd, which had pushed forward eagerly, now began to fall
back with exclamations of fear and disgust.
    The thing looked more manlike now, Simon thought, than when it had
loomed upright before him in the forest of the Stile. With the skin of its
dark face gone slack in death, the menacing snarl erased, it wore the
puzzled expression of a man given unfathomable news. As Strangyeard had
said, it wore a garment of rough cloth around its waist. A belt of some
reddish stones hung dragging in the dust of the commons.
    The fat man beside Simon, who had been exhorting the soldiers to march
faster, turned a merry eye his way.
    “Do you know what he was a-wearing ’round his neck?” he shouted.
Simon, hemmed in on both sides, shrugged. “Skulls!” the man said, as
pleased as if he had given them to the dead giant himself. “Wearing ’em as
a necklace, he was. Giving ’em an Aedonite burial, the prince is—even
though it’s anyone’s guess whose they be.” He turned back to the spectacle
again.
    Several other soldiers had climbed to the top of the pyre, and were
helping the bearers move the massive creature into place. When they had
wrestled it into place, lying on its back at the summit, they slipped the pole
out from between its crossed arms and legs and scrambled down in a group.
As the last man leaped down to the ground, the great body slipped forward
a little way, and the sudden movement made a woman scream. Several
children began to cry. A gray-cloaked officer shouted an order; one of the
soldiers leaned forward and thrust a torch deep into the bundles of straw
that had been laid around the edges. The flames, strangely colorless in the
late afternoon sun, began to bend around the straw, reaching upward toward
more substantial food. Wisps of smoke twined around the form of the giant,
and some current of air bent his shaggy fur like dry summer grass.
   There! He had seen her again, beyond the pyre! Trying to push forward,
he received a sharp elbow to the ribs from someone fighting to retain their
choice viewpoint. He stopped, frustrated, and stared at the spot where he
thought he had spotted her.
   Then he saw, and he realized it was not Marya. This black-haired
woman, wrapped in a somber, exquisitely-sewn green cloak, was perhaps
twenty years older. She was certainly beautiful, though, with ivory skin and
wide, uptilted eyes.
   As Simon stared, she in turn watched the burning giant, whose hair was
beginning to curl and blacken as the fire climbed the mound of pine logs.
The smoke rose like a curtain, obscuring her from Simon’s view; he
wondered who she was, and why—as the Naglimunders all around shouted
and waved their fists at the pillar of smoke—she looked into the blaze with
such sad, angry eyes.