
                         Northern Tidings




“Well, lad,” Towser said, pushing another flagon across the tabletop,
“you couldn’t be righter—trouble they are. Always will be.”
   Simon squinted at the old jester, who suddenly seemed the repository of
all knowledge. “They write letters to a fellow,” he said, and took a generous
swallow, “lying letters.” He set the cup back down on the wood and
watched the wine wash from side to side, threatening to overtop the rim.
   Towser leaned back against the wall of his boxlike room. He was in his
linen undershirt, and had not shaved for a day or two. “They do write those
letters,” he said, nodding his white-bristled chin gravely. “Sometimes they
lie about you to the other ladies.”
   Simon frowned, thinking about it. She had probably done just that,
telling the other highborn noble folk about the stupid scullion who had
ridden with her on a boat down the Aelfwent. It was probably a merry tale
all through the Naglimund.
   He took another swig and felt the sour taste come back up, filling his
mouth with bile. He set the cup down.
   Towser was struggling to his feet. “Look, look,” the old man said, going
to a wooden chest and rummaging about inside. “Damnation, I know it’s
here somewhere.”
   “I should have realized!” Simon berated himself. “She wrote me a note.
How could a serving girl have . . . have known how to spell better than
me?!”
   “Here’s that God-be-cursed lute string!” Towser continued to rummage.
   “But Towser, she wrote me a note—said God bless me! Called me
‘friend.’”
   “What? Well, that’s fine, lad, fine. That’s the kind of girl you want, not
some stuck up fancy-lady who’ll look down on you, like that other. Ah!
Here!”
   “Hah?” Simon had lost the thread. He was virtually positive he had only
been talking of one girl—the arch-traitoress, the identity-shifting Marya . . .
Miriamele . . . well, it didn’t matter very much, did it?
   But she fell asleep on my shoulder. Fuzzily, drunkenly, he remembered
warm breath on his cheek, and felt a corresponding ache of loss.
   “Look at this, lad.” Towser was standing over him, swaying, holding out
something white. Simon stared, puzzled.
   “What is it?”
   “A scarf. For cold weather. Do you see these?” The old man pointed a
bent forefinger at a series of characters woven onto the white in dark blue
thread. The shape of the runes reminded Simon of something that touched
off a throb of cold inside him even through the fog of wine.
   “What are they?” he asked, his voice a little clearer than before.
   “Rimmersgard runes,” the old jester said, smiling absently. “They read
‘Cruinh’—my true name. A girl wove those, wove the scarf. For me. When
I was with my dear King John at Elvritshalla.” Unexpectedly, he began to
cry, feeling his way back to the table to slump down in the hard chair.
Within a few moments the sobbing was over, and water stood in his red-
rimmed eyes like puddles after a sunshower. Simon said nothing.
   “I should have married that one,” Towser said at last. “But she would not
leave her land—wouldn’t come back to the Hayholt. Frightened of foreign
ways, she was, frightened to leave her family. She died years ago, poor
girl.” He sniffled loudly. “And how could I have ever left my good John?”
   “What do you mean?” Simon asked. He couldn’t remember where he’d
seen the Rimmersgard runes lately, or at least he did not want to put out the
effort to recall. Easier just to sit here in the candlelight and let the old man
talk. “When were th . . . when were you in Rimmersgard?” he prompted.
   “Oh, lad, years and years and years.” Towser wiped his eyes without
embarrassment and blew his nose into a capacious kerchief. “It was after
the Battle of Naarved. In the year after it was over, that was when I met the
girl who made this.”
   “What was the Battle of Naarved?” Simon reached out to pour himself
more wine, then thought better of it. What, he wondered, was going on in
the great hall at this moment?
   “Naarved?” Towser goggled. “You don’t know Naarved? Where John
beat old King Jormgrun, and became High King over the north?”
   “I suppose I do know some of it,” Simon said uncomfortably. What a lot
there was to know in the world! “It was a famous battle?”
   “Of course!” Towser’s eyes were bright. “John laid siege to Naarved all
through the winter. Jormgrun and his men never thought that southerners,
Erkynlanders, could survive the cruel Rimmersgard snows. They were sure
that John would have to call off the siege and retreat south. But John did it!
Not only did they break Naarved, but in the final storming John went over
the wall of the inner keep himself and got the portcullis open—held off ten
men until he could cut the guy rope. Then he broke Jormgrun’s shield and
cut him down before his own heathen altar!”
   “Really? And you were there?” Simon had heard this story, more or less,
but it was exciting to hear it from a firsthand witness.
   “As good as. I was in John’s camp; he took me everywhere with him, my
good old king.”
   “How did Isgrimnur get to be duke?”
   “Ah.” Towser’s hand, which had been wringing the white scarf, went in
search of the wine jug and found it. “It was his father Isbeorn who was the
first duke, you see. He was the first of the pagan Rimmersgard nobles to
become enlightened—to receive the grace of Usires Aedon. His house was
made by John the first house of Rimmersgard. So Isbeorn’s son Isgrimnur is
duke now, and a more pious Aedonite you’d have a hard time finding.”
   “What happened to King Jorg-whatever-was-his-name’s sons? Didn’t
any of them want to become Aedonites?”
   “Oh,” Towser waved his hand dismissively, “I think they all died in the
fighting.”
   “Hmmm.” Simon sat back, pushing the confusing business of religion
and paganism out of his mind to try and visualize the great battle. “Did
King John have Bright-Nail then?” he asked.
   “Yes . . . yes, he did,” Towser said. “God’s Tree, he was a beautiful man
to watch in battle. Bright-Nail, it shone so brightly and moved so quickly—
just a blur of steel it was—that sometimes John looked like he was
surrounded by beautiful, holy silver light.” The old jester sighed.
   “So who was the girl?” Simon asked.
   Towser stared. “What girl?”
   “The one who made the scarf for you.”
   “Oh!” Towser frowned, wrinkling. “Sigmar.” He thought for several long
moments. “Well, you see, we did not leave for almost a year. It’s hard work
administering a conquered country, you know, hard work. Harder than
fighting the damned war, it sometimes seemed to me. She was a girl who
cleaned the hall where the king stayed—where I stayed, too. She had hair
the color of gold—no, lighter, it was almost white. I lured her in to me, just
like taming a wild colt: a kind word here, a bit of extra food for her family
there. Ah, she was a pretty one!”
   “Did you want to marry her then?”
   “I think I did. It’s been many a long year, boy. I wanted to take her with
me, that’s sure as sure. But she wouldn’t go.”
   Neither spoke for a while. The storm winds moaned outside the thick
castle walls, like hounds forgotten by their master. Candle wax dripped and
sizzled.
   “If you could go back,” Simon said at last, “if you could be there
again . . .” he struggled with the difficult idea, “would you . . . would you
let her get away a second time?”
   There was no reply at first. Just when Simon was about to reach up and
give a gentle shake, the old man stirred and cleared his throat.
   “I don’t know,” Towser said slowly. “It seems as though God made
happen what He meant to happen, but we must have choices, eh, boy?
Without choices there’s no good. I don’t know—I don’t think I want to
unwrap the past that much. Better the way it is, choices right or wrong.”
   “But choices are so much easier afterward,” Simon said, clambering to
his feet. Towser stared fixedly into the wavering candleflame. “I mean, at
the moment you have to decide on things, you never know enough. It’s only
later that you see everything.”
   He suddenly felt more tired than drunken, caught and tugged at by a
wave of fatigue. He gave thanks for the wine, then said good night to the
old jester and walked out into the deserted courtyard and the slanting rain.
                                    •••

   Simon stood and knocked mud off his boots, watching Haestan stump
away across the damp, wind-lashed hillside. The cookfires of the town
below bled their smokes upward into the steely sky. Unwrapping the cloth
padding from his sword, he watched the white blades of sunlight that thrust
down through the clouds on the northwestern horizon, shafts that might
signify either the presence of a brighter, better place beyond the storm, or
only the impersonal play of light, caring nothing for the world or its
problems. Simon stared upward, rolling the batting in his hands, but his
mood remained unchanged. He felt lonely. Standing amid the swaying
grasses he might as well have been a stone or the stump of a tree.
   Binabik had come by that morning, the sound of his rap at the door
eventually cutting through Simon’s wine-weighted sleep. He had ignored
the rapping and the troll’s faint words until both stopped, and he could roll
back over and doze a little longer. He had no wish to see the little man quite
yet, and had been grateful for the impersonal door between them.
   Haestan had laughed callously at the greenish tinge Simon wore to the
guard barracks, and after promising to take him out sometime soon for
some real drinking, proceeded to sweat the vapors out of him. Although at
first Simon was convinced that his life was being drained from him at the
same time, after an hour or so he thought he could feel his blood once more
begin to flow through his veins. Haestan worked him even harder than the
day before, with cloth-shrouded sword and padded buckler, but Simon was
grateful for the distraction: it was a luxury to submerge himself in the
relentless, pounding rhythm of sword on shield, of swipe and dodge and
counter-swipe.
   Now, with the wind knifing though his sweat-sodden shirt, he picked up
his gear and started back up the slope to the main gate.
   Trudging across the rain-puddled inner courtyard, dodging the squad of
guards in thick wool cloaks on their way out to relieve the sentries, it
seemed to him that all the color had been bled out of Naglimund. The
unhealthy trees, the gray capes of Josua’s guardsmen, the priests’ somber
vestments, every object in his view could have been hewn from stone; even
the hurrying pages were only statues that had been given some sort of
transitory life, but would eventually grind down into immobility again.
   As Simon toyed with, even enjoyed, these gloomy sentiments, his
attention was attracted by a gleam of color that suddenly appeared across a
long open courtyard, colors whose brightness leaped out like a trumpet call
on a quiet evening.
   The extravagant silks belonged to three young women who had swung
out from an archway to skitter headlong, laughing, across the open court.
One wore red and gold, another a yellow like a field of mown hay; the third
had a long, shiny dress of dove-gray and blue. It took him only a fraction of
an instant to recognize the last as Miriamele.
   He was already walking toward the retreating threesome before he knew
what he was up to; a moment later he began to trot as they disappeared
under the long, columned walkway, the sound of their talk floating back to
him like a provocative scent to a chained mastiff. Within thirty long paces
he had caught up.
   “Miriamele!” he said, and it came out of his mouth very loudly, making
him stop short in surprise and embarrassment. “Princess?” he lamely tacked
on as she turned. Recognition was pushed off her face by another emotion
that followed quickly behind, one that looked to him terrifyingly like pity.
   “Simon?” she questioned, but there was no corresponding doubt in her
eyes. They stood, three or four ells between them, facing each other as
though across a canyon. For a moment they only stared, each waiting for
the other’s voice to cross the distance with the proper reply. At last
Miriamele said something short and quiet to her two companions, whose
faces Simon took no notice of, except to register what he was sure was
disapproval in their expressions; the pair backed away, then turned and
walked a short distance ahead.
   “I . . . I feel strange not calling you Marya . . . Princess.” Simon looked
down at the mud splattered on his boottops, his grass-stained pants, and
instead of the shame he would have expected felt a kind of strange, fierce
pride. Perhaps he was a bumpkin; at least he was an honest bumpkin.
   The princess looked him over quickly, saving his face for last. “I’m sorry,
Simon. I didn’t lie to you because I wanted to, but because I had to.” She
unknotted her fingers to make a brief gesture of helplessness. “I’m sorry.”
   “No . . . no need to be sorry. It just . . . just . . .” he searched for words,
keeping his own hands resolutely clamped around his scabbard, “it just
makes things strange, I suppose.”
   Now he was looking her over. He decided that the beautiful dress—
which, he noticed, was striped in green, perhaps in stubborn loyalty to her
father—both added to the Marya he remembered, and took something away
as well. She looked good, he had to admit: her fine, sharp features were
now set, like a valuable stone, in a substance that showed them off properly.
At the same time there was something missing, something funny and earthy
and careless in the Marya who had shared his river journey and the
terrifying night on the Stile. There was not much to remind him of it in her
subdued face, but a hint still lurked in the close-shorn strands of hair that
showed at the neck of her cowl.
   “Did you have your hair dyed black?” he asked at last.
   She smiled shyly. “Yes. I decided a long time before I ran away from the
Hayholt what I needed to do. I cut my hair off—it was very long,” she
added proudly, “then I had a woman in Erchester make it into a wig. Leleth
brought it to me. I hid my cut hair beneath it, which was dyed black so I
could watch the men around my father unrecognized, hear things I wouldn’t
otherwise hear . . . find out what was going on.”
   Simon, despite his discomfort, was full of admiration for the girl’s
cunning. “But why were you spying on me? I wasn’t important.”
   The princess continued to twine and untwine her fingers. “I really wasn’t
spying on you, not the first time. I was listening to an argument my father
had with my uncle in the chapel. The other times . . . well, I did follow you.
I had seen you in the castle, on your own, no one telling you what to do,
where to be, who to smile at and talk to . . . I was envious.”
   “No one telling me what to do!” Simon grinned in spite of himself. “You
never met Rachel the Dragon then, girl!” He caught himself. “Princess, I
mean.”
   Miriamele, who had been smiling, too, again looked uncomfortable.
Simon felt a surge of the anger that had burned in him all night. Who was
she to be uncomfortable around him? Wasn’t he the one who had plucked
her out of a tree? Didn’t she rest her head on his shoulder?
   Yes, but that’s a large part of the problem, isn’t it? he thought.
   “I have to go.” He hoisted the scabbard as though to show her some
detail of its tooling. “I’ve been swording it all day. I’m sure your lady
friends are waiting for you.” He started to turn, then stopped and bent his
knee to her. Her expression became, if anything, more discomforted, more
sad than before.
   “Princess,” he said, and walked away. He did not look back to see if she
watched him go. He held his head up, and his back was very straight.

                                     •••

    Binabik, wearing what looked like his good clothes, a white deerskin
jacket and a necklace of bird skulls, met him on his way back to the room.
Simon greeted him coolly; he was secretly surprised to find that where there
had been a vast store of anger only hours before, there now existed only a
strange emptiness of spirit.
    The troll waited as he scraped more mud from his boots at the doorstep,
then followed him into the room while he changed into the other shirt
Strangyeard had kindly left for him.
    “I am sure you are now angry, Simon,” Binabik began. “I am wanting
you to understand that I did not know about the princess until Josua told me
it the night before the last.”
    The priest’s shirt was long, even on Simon’s lank frame; he tucked it into
his breeches. “Why didn’t you tell me?” he asked, pleased with the light-
headed, casual way he felt. There was no reason he should let the little
man’s bad faith trouble him; he had been on his own before.
    “It was because a promise was made.” Binabik looked very unhappy. “I
was agreeing before I knew to what. But it was only one day you did not
know and I did—would there have been much difference made? She should
have been telling you and me her own self, that is my thinking.”
    There was truth to what the little man said, but Simon did not like to hear
Miriamele criticized, even though he himself blamed her for vaster but
more subtle crimes.
    “It isn’t important now,” was all he said.
    Binabik pulled a poorly-formed smile. “I am hoping that is so. For now,
the important thing is certainly the Raed. Your story should be told, and I
am thinking tonight will be the night. With your departure you did not miss
much, mostly Baron Devasalles looking for assurances from Prince Josua,
should the Nabbanai be committing themselves to his side. But tonight . . .”
   “I don’t want to go.” He rolled up the sleeves, which hung halfway down
over his hands. “I’m going to go see Towser, or maybe Sangfugol.” He
fussed with a cuff. “Is the princess going to be there?”
   The troll looked concerned. “Who can say? But you are needed, Simon.
The Duke and his Rimmersgarders are here. They have arrived less than an
hour gone, cursing and dirty and with their horses blowing froth. There will
be discussion of important things tonight.”
   Simon stared at the floor. It would be simpler just to find the harper and
drink; it did seem to take one’s mind off these kind of problems. Doubtless
there would be some of his new guardsmen acquaintances who might be
good company, too. They could all go down to Naglimund-town, which he
hadn’t really seen yet. It would be so much easier than sitting in that great
room, that heavy room, with the weight of decisions and danger upon them
all. Let others do the discussing, the worrying—he was only a scullion, and
had been out of his depth for too long. Wasn’t that best? Wasn’t it?
   “I’ll go,” he said finally, “but only if I can decide whether I want to talk
or not.”
   “Agreed!” said Binabik, and offered a smile, but Simon was not in the
mood to dole one out in return. He pulled on his cloak, clean now, but
bearing the unmended scars of the road and the forest, and let Binabik lead
him away toward the great hall.




   “This is it!” shouted Duke Isgrimnur of Elvritshalla. “What more proof
does anyone need! He will have all our lands soon enough!”
   Isgrimnur, like his men, had not even taken time yet to shed his traveling
clothes. Water drizzled from his sodden cloak, pooling on the stone floor.
“To think that I once dandled such an unnatural monster on my lap!” He
clutched his chest apoplectically, looking to his men for support. All but the
expressionless, slit-eyed Einskaldir nodded their heads in bleak
commiseration.
   “Duke!” Josua called out, raising his hand, “Isgrimnur, please, sit down.
You have been shouting since the moment you crashed through the door,
and I still do not understand what . . .”
    “What your brother the king has done!?” Isgrimnur purpled, and looked
as though he might grab the prince and throw him over a broad knee. “He
has stolen my land! He has given it to traitors, and they have imprisoned my
son! What more would you have him do to be proved a demon?”
    The assembled lords and generals, who had leaped to their feet when the
Rimmersmen came tumbling and shouting into the room, began to drop
back into the hard wooden chairs, muttering angrily, steel sliding back into
a dozen scabbards with a tuneful hiss.
    “Must I ask your man to talk for you, good Isgrimnur?” Josua asked. “Or
will you be able to tell us what has happened?”
    The old duke glared up the table at the prince for a moment, then slowly
lifted his hand and drew it across his face, as though to wipe away the
sweat. For a dangerous moment, Simon felt sure that Isgrimnur would cry:
the duke’s red face crumpled into a mask of helpless despair, his eyes those
of a stunned animal. He took a step backward and lowered himself into his
seat. “He has given my land to Skali Sharp-nose,” he said at last, and as the
bluster left Isgrimnur’s voice the hollowness rang clear. “I have nothing
else, and nowhere to go but here.” He shook his head.
    Ethelferth of Tinsett stood up, his broad face full of sympathy. “Tell us
what happened, Duke Isgrimnur,” he said. “Here we all share one grief or
another, but we also share a long history of comradeship. We will be each
other’s sword and shield.”
    The duke looked over to him gratefully. “Thank you, Lord Ethelferth.
You are a good comrade, and a good northern man.” He turned back to the
others. “Forgive me. This is disgraceful, the way I’m going on. It’s also no
damnable way to give news. Let me tell you of some things you should
know about.” Isgrimnur picked up a stray wine flagon and drained it.
Several of the other men, anticipating a long story, called for their cups to
be refilled.
    “Much that has happened you will know, I’m sure, since Josua and many
others here were aware already: I told Elias I would not stay at his bidding
in the Hayholt any longer, not while blizzards killed my people and buried
our towns, and while my young son must rule the Rimmersmen in my stead.
The king had resisted me and resisted me for months, but finally said yes. I
took my men and started north.
   “The first thing was that we were ambushed at Saint Hoderund’s; before
we walked into the trap, the ambushers killed the keepers of that holy
place.” Isgrimnur reached up and patted the wooden tree swinging against
his chest. “We fought them and they fled, escaping when we were slowed
by a freakish rainstorm.”
   “I had not heard this,” Devasalles of Nabban said, fixing Isgrimnur with
a contemplative look. “Who ambushed you at the abbey?”
   “I do not know,” the Rimmersman replied, disgusted. “Not a single
prisoner could we take, although we sent a fair lot of them down the cold
road to Hell. Some of them looked like Rimmersgarders. At the time I was
sure they were mercenaries—now I am not so quick to think I know. One of
my relatives fell to them.
   “Secondly, while camped not far north of the Knock, we were set upon
by filthy Bukken, a great hive of them, and on open ground, no less. A
whole armed camp they attacked! We fought them off, too, but not without
great losses . . . Hani, Thrinin, Utë of Saegard . . .”
   “Bukken?” It was hard to tell if Devasalles’ arched eyebrow was a sign
of surprise or contempt. “Are you telling me that your men were attacked
by the little people of legend, Duke Isgrimnur?”
   “A legend in the south, maybe,” Einskaldir sneered from his seat, “a
legend in the soft courts of Nabban; in the north we know them as real, and
keep our axes sharp.”
   Baron Devasalles bristled, but before he would launch an angry reply,
Simon felt a movement at his side, and a voice rang out.
   “Misunderstanding and ignorance both north and south are having in
plenty,” Binabik said, standing on his chair with one hand on Simon’s
shoulder. “The Bukken, the diggers, are not extending their holes much past
the northern borders of Erkynland, but what is good fortune for those
farther south should not be mistaken for universal truth.”
   Devasalles openly gaped in amazement, and he was not the only one.
“And is this one of the Bukken themselves, come as emissary to Erkynland?
Now I have seen everything under the sun, and die happy!”
   “If I am the strangest thing you see before a year is out . . .” Binabik
began, when he was interrupted by Einskaldir, leaping out of his seat to
stand beside the startled Isgrimnur.
    “It is worse than a Bukka!” he snarled. “It is a troll—a hell-wight!” He
tried to push past the duke’s restraining arm. “What is this stealer-of-babies
doing here?”
    “More good than you, you hulking and bearded idiot!” Binabik snapped
back; the assembly collapsed into general shouting and confusion. Simon
grabbed the troll’s waist, as the little man had leaned so far forward he
threatened to tumble onto the wine-stained table. At last Josua’s voice could
be heard above the clamor, calling angrily for order.
    “Aedon’s Blood, I will not have this! Are you men or children?!
Isgrimnur, Binabik of Yiqanuc is here by my invitation. If your man does
not respect the rules of my hall, he may try the hospitality of a tower cell! I
wish an apology!” The prince tilted forward like a stooping hawk, and
Simon, clutching Binabik’s jacket, was struck by the resemblance to the
dead High King. Here was Josua as he should be!
    Isgrimnur bowed his head. “I apologize for my liegeman, Josua. He is
hotheaded, and not broken to courteous company.” The Rimmersman
turned a fierce look on Einskaldir who sat down again, muttering silently in
his beard, eyes cast to the floor. “Our people and the trolls are age-old
enemies,” the duke explained.
    “The trolls of Yiqanuc are no one’s enemy,” Binabik replied, more than a
little haughtily. “It is the Rimmersmen who are so frightened by our great
size and strength that they attack wherever they see us—even in the hall of
Prince Josua.”
    “Enough.” Josua waved his hand in disgust. “This is no place for the
unstoppering of old bottles. Binabik, you will have your say. Isgrimnur, you
have a story yet to finish.”
    Devasalles cleared his throat. “One thing only let me say, Prince.” He
turned to Isgrimnur. “Faced with the little man from . . . Yiqanuc? . . . I find
your story of Bukken easier to credit. Forgive my doubting words, good
Duke.”
    Isgrimnur’s frown softened at the edges. “Say nothing of it, Baron,” he
grumbled. “I have forgotten it, as I’m sure you’ve forgotten Einskaldir’s
foolish speech.”
    The duke paused for a moment to marshal his scattered thoughts.
    “Well, as I was saying, that was the strangeness of it all. Even in the
Frostmarch and the northern wastes the Bukken are scarce—and we are
thankful to God it is so. For them to attack an armed force of our size is
simply unheard of. The Bukken are small,” his gaze lit briefly on Binabik,
and slid off onto Simon. Arrested, the duke frowned again, staring.
“Small . . . they are small . . . but fierce, and dangerous when they attack in
numbers.” Shaking his head, as if to banish Simon’s disturbing familiarity,
Isgrimnur turned his attention back to the others gathered around the long,
looping table.
   “After escaping the hole dwellers, and making our way here to
Naglimund, we quickly resupplied and headed north again. I was anxious to
see my home again, and my son and wife.
   “The upper Wealdhelm Road and the Frostmarch Road are not good
places these days. Those of you whose lands are north of here know what I
mean without any more talk needed. We were happy to see the lights of
Vestvennby below us the night of the sixth day out.
   “The next morning we were met before the gate by Storfot, Thane of
Vestvennby—what you would call a baron, I suppose—and a half-hundred
of his housecarls. But had he come to welcome his duke?
   “Embarrassed—and well he should be, the treacherous dog—he tells me
that Elias has called me the traitor, and given my lands over to Skali Sharp-
nose. Storfot says that Skali wants me to surrender myself, and he, Storfot,
will take me to Elvritshalla where my son Isorn is already being held . . .
and that Skali will be fair and merciful. Fair! Skali of Kaldskryke, who slew
his own brother in a drunken brawl! Would grant me mercy under my own
roof!
   “If my men hadn’t held me back . . . if they hadn’t . . .” Duke Isgrimnur
had to stop for a moment, twisting his beard in fretful anger. “Well,” he
resumed, “you may guess I was all for disemboweling Storfot on the
instant. Better to die with a sword in my guts, I thought, then to bow to a
pig like Skali. But, as Einskaldir pointed out, best of all will be to take back
my hall and make Skali eat steel.”
   Isgrimnur shared a brief, sour grin with his carl, then turned back to the
assembly and slapped his empty scabbard. “So, that I promise. If I have to
crawl on my old, fat belly all the way to Elvritshalla, I swear by Dror’s
Hamm . . . by Usires Aedon, I mean—your pardon, Bishop Anodis—I will
be there to put my good sword Kvalnir a yard into his guts.”
   Gwythinn, prince of Hernystir, who had been unusually silent, now
pounded a fist on the table. His cheeks were flushed, but not, Simon
thought, just by wine, although the young Westerner had been drinking that
in plenty. “Good!” the prince said. “But see, Isgrimnur, see: it is not this
Skali who is your greatest enemy—no, it is the king himself!”
   A rumble went around the table, but this time it seemed mostly one of
approval. The idea of having one’s lands taken away and handed to a blood
rival struck a deep and threatening spot in almost everyone.
   “The Hernystirman speaks rightly!” shouted fat Ordmaer, heaving his
bulk up from his seat. “It is obvious that Elias only kept you at the Hayholt
so long in order for Skali to work his treachery. Elias is the enemy behind it
all.”
   “As he has worked through his only-too-willing tools, Guthwulf and
Fengbald and the others, to trample on the rights of most of you here!”
Gwythinn had the bit in his teeth now, and he was pulling hard. “It is Elias
who is reaching out to crush us all, until there is no resistance to the reign of
misfortune, until the rest of us are taxed into poverty, or ground beneath the
heels of Elias’ knights. The High King is the enemy, and we must act!”
   Gwythinn turned to Josua, overlooking the proceedings like a gray
statue. “It is for you, Prince, to show us the lead. Your brother doubtless has
plans for us all, as he has shown so clearly with you and Isgrimnur! Is he
not our true, and most dangerous enemy?!”
   “No! He is not!”
   The startling voice cracked like a drover’s whip through Naglimund’s
great hall. Simon, with every other soul in the room, whirled to see who had
spoken. It was not the prince, who stood as baffled as everyone else.
   For a moment it seemed that the old man had materialized out of the
insubstantial air, so suddenly did he step forward from the shadows into the
glow of the wall sconce. He was tall, and almost impossibly spare; the
torchlight cast deep shadows in the hollows of his cheeks, and beneath the
bony ridge of his brow. He wore a cloak of wolfskin, and his long white
beard was tucked into his belt; to Simon he looked like some wild spirit of
the winter forest.
   “Who are you, old man?” Josua called. Two of his guards stepped
forward to stand at either side of the prince’s chair. “And how do you come
to be in our councils?”
    “He is one of Elias’ spies!” hissed one of the northern lords, and others
echoed him.
    Isgrimnur stood. “He is here because I brought him, Josua,” the duke
growled. “He was waiting for us on our road to Vestvennby—knew where
we were bound, and knew before we did that we would return here. He said
that one way or another he was coming to speak to you.”
    “And that it would only be better for everyone if I arrived as soon as was
possible,” the old man finished, fixing his luminous blue eyes on the prince.
“I have things of importance to tell you—to tell you all.” He turned his
disturbing gaze along the length of the table, and the whispering ceased in
its wake. “You may listen or not, that is your choice . . . that is always the
choice in matters like these.”
    “These are children’s riddles, man,” mocked Devasalles. “Whoever are
you, and what do you know of the things we debate? In Nabban,” he smiled
up at Josua, “we would send this old fool to the Vilderivan Brothers, whose
purview is the care of lunatics.”
    “We are not speaking of southern matters here, Baron,” the old man said,
with a smile cold as a row of icicles, “though soon the south, too, will feel
chill fingers at its throat.”
    “Enough!” Josua cried. “Speak now, or I shall have you put in chains as a
spy indeed. Who are you, and what is your business with us?!”
    The old man nodded stiffly. “Your pardon. I am long out of practice with
the ways of courts. Jarnauga is my name, late of Tungoldyr.”
    “Jarnauga!” Binabik said, climbing back onto his chair to peer at the
new arrival. “Amazing! Jarnauga! Ho, I am Binabik! I was for long
apprenticing with Ookequk!”
    The old man pinned the troll with his bright, steely eyes. “Yes. We shall
talk, and soon. But first I have business in this hall, with these men.” He
stood straight, facing the prince’s chair.
    “King Elias is the enemy, I heard the young Hernystirman say, and I
heard others echo him. You are all of you like mice, who speak in hushed
tones of the terrible cat, and dream in the walls of doing away with him
someday. Not a one of you realizes that it is not the cat who is the problem,
but the master who brought him in to kill mice.”
    Josua leaned forward, displaying reluctant interest. “Are you saying that
Elias himself is someone’s pawn? Who? That devil Pryrates, I suppose?”
   “Pryrates presumes to deviltry,” the old man sneered, “but he is a child. I
speak of one to whom the lives of kings are flitting moments . . . one who
will take away far more than your lands.”
   The men began to talk among themselves. “Has this mad monk broken in
upon us to lecture us on the works of the Devil?” one of the barons cried.
“It is no secret to us that the Arch-fiend uses men for his purposes.”
   “I do not speak of your Aedonite master-demon,” Jarnauga said, then
turned his gaze back to the prince’s tall chair. “I speak of the true master-
demon of Osten Ard, who is as real as this stone,” he squatted and slapped a
palm on the floor, “and as much a part of our land.”
   “Blasphemy!” someone shouted. “Throw him out!”
   “No, let him speak!”
   “Speak up, old man!”
   Jarnauga raised his hands. “I am not some mad, half-frozen holy man
come to save your imperiled souls.” He pinched his mouth in a bleak smile.
“I come to you as one of the League of the Scroll, one who has lived his life
beside—and spent that life watching—the deadly mountain called
Stormspike. We of the League of the Scroll, as the troll can confirm for you,
have for long kept vigil while others slept. Now I come to fulfill a vow
made long-ago . . . and to tell you things you will wish you had never
heard.”
   A nervous silence fell over the hall as the old man walked across the
room and pushed open the door that led to the courtyard. The howl of the
wind, that had been only a dim moan, was loud in everyone’s ears.
   “Yuven-month!” Jarnauga said. “It is only weeks till Midsummer! Listen:
can a king, even the High King, do this?!” A swirl of rain blew past him
like smoke. “There are fur-clad Hunën, giants, a-hunting men in the
Wealdhelm. Bukken crawl from the cold earth to attack armed soldiers on
the Frostmarch, and the forge fires of Stormspike in the north burn all night
long. I myself have watched the glow against the sky, and heard the icy
hammers falling! How do you think Elias has caused all this? Do you not
see that there is a black, fell winter coming down on you out of all season,
beyond all your power of understanding?”
   Isgrimnur stood again, round face pale, eyes squinting. “What then, man,
what? Are you saying, Udun One-Eye help me, that we are fighting . . . the
White Foxes out of old legends?” Behind him was a chorus of whispered
questions and shocked mumblings.
    Jarnauga stared at the duke, and his seamed face softened with an
expression that might have been pity, or sorrow. “Ah, Duke Isgrimnur, bad
as the White Foxes—who some know as the Norns—bad as they would be,
it would be a boon to us if it were the whole case. But I tell you that
Utuk’ku, the queen of the Norns herself, mistress of the dreadful mountain
Sturmrspeik, is no more the guiding hand than is Elias.”
    “Hold, man, just hold your tongue a moment.” Devasalles leaped up
angrily, robes billowing. “Prince Josua, forgive me, but it is bad enough this
madman walks in and disrupts the council, stealing away the floor with no
explanation of who or what he is, but now, as emissary for Duke Leobardis,
I must waste my time listening to northern bogey tales? This is
insufferable!”
    As the hubbub of argument rose again, Simon felt a strange, exciting
chill. To think that he and Binabik had been in the center of it all, in the
middle of a tale that would boggle anything Shem Horsegroom could
devise! But as he thought of the story he might tell beside the fire one day,
he remembered the muzzles of the Norn hounds, and the pale faces in the
dark mountain of his dreams, and again, not for the first time or the last,
wished desperately that he was back in the Hayholt kitchen, that nothing
had changed, that nothing would ever change. . . .
    Old Bishop Anodis, who had been watching the new arrival with the
keen, fierce gaze of a gull confronting a newcomer to his favorite
scavenging ground, arose.
    “I must say, and I feel no shame in admitting it, that I have thought very
little of this . . . this Raed. Elias has perhaps made mistakes, but His
Holiness the Lector Ranessin has offered to mediate, to try and find a way
to bring peace between Aedonites, including, of course, their honorable
pagan allies,” he nodded perfunctorily in the direction of Gwythinn and his
men, “but all I have heard is talk of war, and the spilling of Aedonite blood
in revenge for petty insults.”
    “Petty insults?!” Isgrimnur fumed. “You call the theft of my duchy a
petty insult, Bishop? Let you come home to find your church a . . . a
damned Hyrka stable, or a nest of trolls, and see if you find it a ‘petty
insult’!”
    “Nest of trolls?!” said Binabik, rising.
    “And this only proves my point,” Anodis snapped, wielding the Tree in
his knotted hand as though it were a knife to hold off bandits. “See, you
shout at a churchman when he seeks to correct your foolish ways.” He drew
himself up. “And now,” he waved the Tree at Jarnauga, “now this . . .
this . . . bearded hermit comes to tell tales of witches and demons, and drive
a wedge larger still between the only sons of the High King! Who does that
benefit, eh? Who does this Jarnauga serve, eh?” Red and shaking, the
bishop collapsed into his chair, taking the flagon of water his acolyte
brought and drinking thirstily.
    Simon reached up and pulled on Binabik’s arm until his friend sat down.
    “I am still wanting an explanation for ‘nest of trolls,’” he growled under
his breath, but at Simon’s frown he pursed his lips and was silent.
    Prince Josua sat staring for some time at Jarnauga, who bore the prince’s
eye as calmly as a cat.
    “I have heard of the League of the Scroll,” Josua said at last. “It was not
my understanding that its adherents tried to influence the ways of rulers and
states.”
    “I have not heard of this so-called League,” Devasalles said, “and I think
it is time this strange old man told us who sends him, and what it is that
endangers us—if it is not the High King as many here seem to think it is.”
    “For once I agree with the Nabbanman,” Gwythinn of Hernystir called
out. “Let Jarnauga tell us all, that we may decide whether to believe him or
drive him from the hall.”
    In the highest chair Prince Josua nodded. The old Rimmersman looked
around at the expectant features, then raised his hands in a strange gesture,
touching fingers to thumbs as though to hold a slender thread before his
eyes.
    “Good,” he said. “Good. Thus we are on the first steps of the road, the
only road that might possibly lead us out of the mountain’s black shadow.”
He spread his arms, as though drawing the invisible thread out to great
length, then opened his hands wide.
    “The story of the League is only a small story,” he began, “but it fits
inside a larger story.” Again he walked to the door, which a page had closed
to keep the warmth in the high-raftered hall. Jarnauga touched the heavy
frame. “We can close this door, but that does not make the snow and hail go
away. In the same manner, you can call me mad—that will not make he who
menaces you go away, either. He has waited five centuries to take back
what he feels is his, and his hand is colder and stronger than any of you can
understand. His is the larger story, inside which the tale of the League is
nestled like an old arrowhead stuck in a great tree, over which the bark has
grown thick until the arrow itself is hidden.
   “The winter that is upon us now, the winter that has dethroned summer
from its rightful place, is his. It is the symbol of his power as he reaches out
and begins to shape things to his will.”
   Jarnauga stared fiercely, and for a stretching moment there was no sound
but the wind’s lonely singing beyond the walls.
   “Who?” Josua asked at last. “What is the name of this thing, old man?”
   “I thought you might know, Prince,” Jarnauga replied. “You are a man
who has learned many things.
   “Your enemy . . . our enemy . . . died five hundred years ago; the place
where his first life ended lies beneath the foundations of the castle where
your life began. He is Ineluki . . . the Storm King.”