
                     From the Ashes of Asu’a




“Stories within stories,” Jarnauga intoned, shucking off his wolfskin
cloak. The firelight revealed the twining snakes that banded the skin of his
long arms, occasioning fresh whispers. “I cannot tell you the story of the
League of the Scroll without you first understanding the fall of Asu’a. The
end of King Eahlstan Fiskerne, he who constructed the League as a wall
against darkness, cannot be separated from the end of Ineluki, whose
darkness is now upon us. Thus, the stories are woven together, one strand
upon the other. If you pull a single thread away it is just that—a single
thread. I defy any man to read a tapestry from a solitary strand.”
   As he spoke Jarnauga ran slender fingers through his knotted beard,
smoothing it and arranging its great length as though it were a kind of
tapestry itself, and might lend some sense to his story.
   “Long before men came to Osten Ard,” he said, “the Sithi were here.
There is no man or woman who knows when they came, but they did,
traveling out of the east, out of the rising sun, until they settled at last in this
land.
   “In Erkynland, on the site where the Hayholt now stands, they made their
greatest work of hands, the castle Asu’a. They delved deep into the earth,
laying its foundations into the very bones of Osten Ard, then built walls of
ivory and pearl and opal stretching up higher than the trees, and towers that
stood against the sky like the masts of ships, towers from which all of Osten
Ard could be seen, and from which the sharp-eyed Sithi could watch the
great ocean bounding the western shore.
   “For countless years they lived alone in Osten Ard, building their fragile
cities on the mountain slopes and in the deeps of the forest, delicate hill-
cities like icy flowers, and forest settlements like earthbound boats with
many sails. But Asu’a was the greatest, and the long-lived kings of the Sithi
ruled there.
   “When men first came, it was as simple herders and fishermen,
wandering over some long-vanished land bridge in the northern wastes,
fleeing some fearful thing behind them in the west, perhaps, or merely
looking for new grazing lands. The Sithi paid them no more mind than they
did the deer or the wild cattle, even when the swift generations multiplied,
and Man began to build himself stone cities, and forge bronze tools and
weapons. As long as they did not take what was the Sithi’s, and stayed on
the lands the Erl-king had allowed them, there was peace between the
peoples.
   “Even the empire of Nabban in the south, glorious in its arts and its arms,
that put all mortal men of Osten Ard beneath its long shadow, caused no
concern to the Sithi, or their king, Iyu’unigato.”
   Here Jarnauga looked about for something to drink, and as a page filled a
flagon for him the listeners exchanged looks and puzzled murmurs.
   “Doctor Morgenes told me about this,” Simon whispered to Binabik. The
troll smiled and nodded, but appeared distracted by thoughts of his own.
   “There is no need, I’m sure,” Jarnauga resumed, his voice raised to
recapture the attention of the muttering throng, “to speak about the changes
that came with the first Rimmersmen. There will be old wounds enough that
shall be opened without dwelling on what happened when they found their
way across the water, out of the west.
   “But what must be spoken of is the march of King Fingil down out of the
north, and the fall of Asu’a. Five long centuries have covered much of the
story with the debris of time and ignorance, but when Eahlstan the Fisher
King chartered our League two hundred years ago, it was to find and
preserve such knowledge. Thus, there are things I will now tell you that
most of you have never heard.
   “At the Battle of the Knock, and Ach Samrath Plain, and in the
Utanwash—at one place and another Fingil and his armies triumphed, and
drew the noose tight around Asu’a. The Sithi lost their last human allies at
the Summerfield, Ach Samrath, and with the Hernystiri routed there were
none among the Sithi who could stand against northern iron.”
   “Routed by treachery!” said Prince Gwythinn, red-faced and trembling.
“Naught but treachery could drive Sinnach from the field—the corruption
of the Thrithings-men, stabbing the Hernystiri in the back in hopes of some
crumbs from Fingil’s bloody table!”
   “Gwythinn!” Josua barked. “You have heard Jarnauga: these are old
wounds. There is not even a Thrithings-man present. Would you leap across
the table and strike Duke Isgrimnur, since he is a Rimmersman?”
   “Let him try,” growled Einskaldir.
   Gwythinn shook his head, abashed. “You are right, Josua. Jarnauga, my
apologies.” The old man nodded, and Lluth’s son turned to Isgrimnur. “And
of course, good Duke, we are here the thickest of allies.”
   “No offense was taken, young sir,” Isgrimnur smiled, but beside him
Einskaldir caught Gwythinn’s eyes and two stared hard at each other.
   “So it was,” Jarnauga continued, as if there had been no interruption,
“that in Asu’a, even though its walls were bound with old and powerful
magics, home and heart of the Sithi race though it was, still there was a
sense that things were at their ending, that the upstart mortals would throw
down the house of their elders, and that the Sithi would pass from Osten
Ard forever.
   “Iyu’unigato the king dressed himself all in mourning white, and with his
queen Amerasu spent the long days of Fingil’s siege—which quickly
became months, then years, for even cold steel could not throw down the
work of the Sithi overnight—listening to melancholy music; and the poetry
of the Sithi’s brighter days in Osten Ard. From the outside, in the camps of
the besieging northerners, Asu’a still seemed a place of great power,
wrapped tight in glamour and sorceries . . . but inside the gleaming husk the
heart was rotting away.
   “There was one among the Sithi, though, who wished it otherwise, and
was not content to spend his last days keening over lost peace and ravaged
innocence. He was Iyu’unigato’s son, and his name was . . . Ineluki.”
   Without saying a word, but not without a good deal of noise, Bishop
Anodis was gathering his things together. He waved his hand for his young
acolyte, who helped him to his feet.
   “Your pardon, Jarnauga,” Josua said. “Bishop Anodis, why are you
leaving us? As you can hear, there are dreadful things moving against us.
We look for your wisdom and the strength of Mother Church to guide us.”
   Anodis looked up crossly. “And I should sit here, in the midst of a war
council I never approved of, and listen to this . . . this wild man speaking
the names of heathen demons? Look at you all—hanging on his words as
though they were every one from the Book of the Aedon.”
   “Those of whom I speak were born long before your holy book, Bishop,”
said Jarnauga mildly, but there was a fierce, combative tilt to his head.
   “It is fantasy,” Anodis grunted. “You think me a sour old man, but I tell
you that such children’s tales shall lead you into perdition. The greater
sadness, though, is that you may drag all our land down with you.”
   He sketched the sign of the Tree before him like a shield, then tottered
out on the arm of the young priest.
   “Fantasy or no, demons or Sithi,” Josua said, rising from his chair to
survey the assembly, “this is my hall, and I have asked this man to tell us
what he knows. There will be no further interruptions.” He cast his eye
about the shadowed room, then sat down, satisfied.
   “Well you should attend now,” Jarnauga said, “for this is the meat of
what I bring you. I speak of Ineluki, son of Iyu’unigato the Erl-king.
   “Ineluki, whose name means ‘here is bright speech’ in the Sithi tongue,
was the younger of the king’s two sons. Together with his older brother
Hakatri he had fought the worm Hidohebhi the Black, mother of the red
worm Shurakai that Prester John slew, and mother as well of Igjarjuk, the
white dragon of the north.”
   “Your pardon, Jarnauga?” One of Gwythinn’s companions stood. “This is
strange to us, but perhaps not all unfamiliar. We Hernystiri know stories of
a black dragon, the mother of all worms, but in them she was called
Drochnathair.”
   Jarnauga nodded, as a master at a pupil. “That was her name among the
first men in the west, long before Hern built the Taig at Hernysadharc. Thus
do bits and pieces of older truth survive in the stories children hear in their
beds, or soldiers and hunters share around a campfire. But Hidohebhi was
her Sithi name, and she was more powerful than either of her children. In
the killing of her, which itself became a long and famous story, Ineluki’s
brother Hakatri was horribly wounded, burned by the worm’s terrible fires.
There was no cure for his injuries or their unending pain in all of Osten
Ard, but neither did he die. At last the king had him put in a boat with his
most trusted servant, and they passed away over the ocean toward the West,
where the Sithi hoped there was a land beyond the setting sun, a place
without pain, where Hakatri might be whole again.
   “Thus Ineluki, despite the great deed of slaying Hidohebhi, became his
father’s heir under the shadow of Hakatri’s fall. Blaming himself, perhaps,
he spent long years in the pursuit of knowledge that likely should have been
barred to man and Sithi alike. At first he may have thought that he could
make his brother well, bring him back from the uncharted west . . . but as
with all such quests, soon the search became its own reason and reward, and
Ineluki, he whose beauty had once been the silent music of the palace of
Asu’a, became more and more a stranger to his people, a searcher in dark
places.
   “So it was that when the men of the north rose up, pillaging and slaying,
to encircle Asu’a at last in a ring of poisonous iron, Ineluki was the one
who set his mind to defeating the trap.
   “In the deep caverns below Asu’a, lit by cunning mirrors, grew the
witchwood gardens, the place where the Sithi tended the trees whose
strange wood they used as the southern men used bronze, and as the
northerners used iron. The witchwood trees, whose roots, some say, reached
down into the very center of the earth, were tended by gardeners as sacred
as priests. Every day they spoke the old spells and performed the
unchanging rituals that made the witchwood thrive, as the king and his
court in the palace above sank more and more into despair and
forgetfulness.
   “But Ineluki had not forgotten the gardens, nor had he forgotten the dark
books he had read, and the shadowy paths he had walked in search of
wisdom. In his chambers, where none of the others came anymore, he
began a task that he thought would be the saving of Asu’a and the Sithi.
   “Somehow, causing himself great pain, he procured black iron, which he
gave to the witchwood trees as a monk waters his vines. Many of the trees,
no less sensitive than the Sithi themselves, sickened and died, but one
survived.
   “Ineluki wove this tree ’round with spells, with words older perhaps than
the Sithi, and charms that reached down farther even than the witchwood’s
roots. The tree grew strong again, and this time poisonous iron ran though it
like blood. The caretakers of the sacred garden, seeing their charges
blighted, fled. They told Iyu’unigato the king, and he was concerned, but
seeing as he did the end of all things, would not stop his son. What use was
witchwood now, with bright-eyed men all around, and deadly iron in their
hands?
   “The growing of the tree sickened Ineluki, even as it did the gardens
themselves, but his will was stronger than any illness. He persevered, until
at last it was time to reap the sought-for harvest. He took his dreadful
planting, the witchwood all shot through with baleful iron, and went up into
the forges of Asu’a.
   “Haggard, sick to madness, yet full of grim resolve, he watched the
master smiths of Asu’a flee before him and did not care. By himself he
heated the forge fires hotter than they had ever been; alone he chanted the
Words of Making, all the while wielding the Hammer That Shapes, which
none but the High Smith had ever held before.
   “Alone in the red-lit depths of the forge he made a sword, a terrible gray
sword whose very substance seemed to breathe dismay. Such hideous,
unholy magics did Ineluki call up during its forging that the very air of
Asu’a seemed to crackle with heat, and the walls swayed as though struck
by giant fists.
   “He took the new-forged sword, then, into his father’s great hall,
thinking to show his people the thing that would save them. Instead, so
terrible was his aspect, and so distressing was the gray sword, shining with
an almost unbearable light, that the Sithi ran in horror from the hall, leaving
only Ineluki and his father Iyu’unigato.”

                                     •••

   In the deepening hush that surrounded Jarnauga’s words, a quiet so
profound that even the fire seemed to have stopped sputtering, as though it,
too, held its breath, Simon felt the hairs on his neck and arms stand upright,
and a strange dizziness creep through him.
   A . . . sword! A gray sword! I can see it so clearly! What does it mean?
Why does the thought stick in my head? He scratched hard at his scalp with
both hands, as though in his pain he might shake the answer loose.
                                     •••

   “When the Erl-king at last saw what his son had made, he must have felt
his heart turn to ice in his chest, for the blade Ineluki held was no mere
weapon, but a blasphemy against the earth that had yielded both iron and
witchwood. It was a hole in the tapestry of creation, and life leaked away
through it.
   “‘Such a thing should not be,’ he told his son. ‘Better that we should go
into the forgetful void, better that the mortals gnaw on our bones—better
even that we had never lived at all than such a thing should ever be made,
let alone used.’
   “But Ineluki was maddened with the power of the thing, and horribly
tangled in the spells that created it. ‘It is the one weapon that will save us!’
he told his father. ‘Otherwise these creatures, these insects, will swarm over
the face of the land, destroying as they go, obliterating beauty they cannot
even see or comprehend. It is worth any price to prevent that!’
   “‘No,’ said Iyu’unigato, ‘No. Some prices are too great. Look at you!
Even now it has worn your mind and heart away. I am your king, as well as
your sire, and I command you to destroy it, before it devours you utterly.’
   “But to hear his father demand such a thing, the unmaking of what he
had nearly died a-forging—and only done, as he thought, to save his people
from final darkness—drove Ineluki past all caring. In that moment he lifted
the sword and struck his father down, killing the king of the Sithi.
   “Never before had such a thing been done, and when Ineluki saw
Iyu’unigato lying before him he wept and wept, not only for his father, but
also for himself, and his people. At last he lifted the gray sword up before
his eyes. ‘From sorrow have you come,’ he said, ‘and sorrow you have
brought with you. Sorrow shall be your name.’ Thus he named the blade
Jingizu, which is the word in Sithi-tongue.”

                                     •••

   Sorrow . . . a sword named Sorrow . . . Simon heard it in his mind as an
echo, bouncing back and forth through his thoughts until it seemed it would
drown out Jarnauga’s words, the storm outside, everything. Why did it
sound so terribly familiar? Sorrow . . . Jingizu . . . Sorrow . . .
                                    •••

   “But the story does not end there,” the northerner said, his voice gaining
strength even as its spell flung a pall of unease over the listening company.
“Ineluki, more maddened than ever by what he had done, nevertheless took
up his father’s crown of white birchwood and proclaimed himself king. So
stunned were his family and folk by the murder that they had no stomach to
resist him. Some actually welcomed the change in secret, five in particular
who, like Ineluki, had been angered by the idea of passive surrender to the
surrounding mortals.
   “Ineluki, with Sorrow in his hand, was a force unbridled. With his five
servants—whom the terrified and superstitious northerners named the Red
Hand for their number and fire-colored cloaks—Ineluki took the battle
outside the walls of Asu’a, for the first time in almost three years of siege.
Only the sheer numbers, the iron-wielding thousands of Fingil’s horde,
prevented the night-terror that Ineluki had become from breaking the siege.
As it was, if the other Sithi had rallied behind them it could be that Sithi
kings would still walk the battlements of the Hayholt.
   “But Ineluki’s people had no will left to fight. Frightened of their new
king, horrified by his murder of Iyu’unigato, they instead took advantage of
the mayhem caused by Ineluki and his Red Hand to flee Asu’a, led by
Amerasu the queen and Shima’onari, son of Ineluki’s dragon-doomed
brother Hakatri. They escaped into the dark but protective ways of
Aldheorte forest, hiding from the blood-mad mortals and their own king.
   “Thus it was that Ineluki found himself left with little more than his five
warriors in the glittering skeleton of Asu’a. Even his powerful magics had
proved too little at the end to withstand the sheer numbers of Fingil’s army.
The northern shamans spoke their weirds, and the last protective magics fell
away from the age-old walls. With pitch and straw and torches the
Rimmersmen set the delicate buildings to burning. As the smoke and
licking flames rose, the northerners routed out the last of the Sithi—those
who had been too weak or timid to flee, or who had felt too much loyalty to
their immemorial home. In those fires Fingil’s Rimmersmen did terrible
deeds; the remaining Sithi had little strength left to resist. Their world had
come to an end. The cruel murders, the heartless tortures and ravishings of
unresisting victims, the laughing destruction of a thousand exquisite and
irreplaceable things—with all these Fingil Redhand’s army put his crimson
stamp on our history, and left a stain that can never be removed. Doubtless
those who had fled to the forest heard the screams and shuddered, and wept
to their ancestors for justice.
   “In this last, most fatal hour Ineluki took his Red Hand and climbed to
the summit of the tallest tower. He had decided, it seems clear, that what the
Sithi could no longer inhabit would never be the home of men.
   “That day he spoke words more terrible than any he had spoken before,
more baleful by far than even those which had helped bind the substance of
Sorrow. As his voice boomed out above the conflagration, Rimmersmen fell
screaming in the courtyard, faces blackening and with blood running from
their eyes and ears. The chanting rose to an intolerable pitch, and then
became a vast scream of agony. A huge flash of light turned the sky white,
followed a moment later by a darkness so complete that even Fingil, in his
tent a mile away, thought he had been struck blind.
   “But, in some way, Ineluki had failed. Asu’a still stood, and still burned,
although now much of Fingil’s army lay wailing and dying on the ground at
the tower’s base. In the tower top itself, strangely untouched by smoke or
flame, the wind sifted six piles of gray ash, scattering them slowly across
the floor.”

                                    •••

   Sorrow . . . Simon’s head was whirling, and he had difficulty drawing
breath. The torchlight seemed to be flickering wildly. The hillside. I heard
the wagon wheels . . . they brought Sorrow! I remember it was like the Devil
in a box . . . the heart of all sorrow.

                                    •••

   “So Ineluki died. One of Fingil’s lieutenants, as he breathed his last
breath minutes later, swore that he had seen a great form billowing out of
the tower, crimson as coals in a fire, writhing like smoke, grasping at the
sky like a huge red hand . . .”
   “Nooooo!” Simon shouted, leaping up. A hand reached up to restrain
him, then another, but he shook them off as though they were cobwebs.
“They brought the gray sword, the horrible sword! And then I saw him! I
saw Ineluki! He was . . . he was . . . !”
  The room was wobbling back and forth, and staring faces—Isgrimnur,
Binabik, the old man Jarnauga—loomed up before him like fish leaping in a
pond. He wanted to say more, to tell them all about the hillside and the
white demons, but a black curtain was being pulled before his eyes, and
something was roaring in his ears. . . .

                                     •••

   Simon ran in dark places, and his only companions were words in the
emptiness.
   Mooncalf! Come to us! There is a place here prepared for you!
   A boy! A mortal child! What did it see, what did it see?
   Freeze his eyes and carry him down into shade. Cover him with clinging,
stinging frost.
   A shape loomed before him, an antler-headed shadow massive as a hill.
It wore a crown of pale stones; and its eyes were red fires. Red was its
hand, too, and when it clutched and lifted him the fingers burned like fiery
brands. White faces flickered up all around, wavering in the darkness like
candle flames.
   The wheel is turning, mortal, turning, turning . . . Who are you to stop it?
   A fly he is, a little fly . . .
   The crimson fingers squeezed, and the fiery eyes glowed with dark and
infinite humor. Simon screamed and screamed, but was answered only by
pitiless laughter.

                                     •••

   He awoke from a strange swirl of chanting voices and clutching hands to
find his dream mirrored in the circle of faces that bent over him, pale in the
torchlight as a fairy ring of mushrooms. Beyond the blurry faces the walls
seemed lined with points of glinting light, mounting up into the darkness
above.
   “He’s waking up,” a voice said, and suddenly the glimmering points
came clear as rows of pots hanging on racks. He was lying on the floor of a
pantry.
   “Doesn’t look good,” said a deep voice nervously. “I’d best get him some
more water.”
   “I’m sure he’ll be fine if you want to go back inside,” the first voice
replied, and Simon felt himself squinting and goggling until the face that
went with it was no longer a blur. It was Marya—no, it was Miriamele,
kneeling beside him; he couldn’t help noticing how the hem of her dress lay
crumpled beneath her on the dirty stone floor.
   “No, no,” the other said: Duke Isgrimnur, pulling nervously at his beard.
   “What . . . happened?” Had he fallen and struck his head? He reached up
to feel gingerly around, but the soreness was general, and there was no
lump.
   “Keeled over, you did, boy,” Isgrimnur grunted. “Shouting about . . .
about things you saw. I carried you out here, fair busted a gut doing it, too.”
   “And then stood there staring at you lying on the floor,” said Miriamele,
her voice stern. “It’s a good thing I was coming in.” She looked up at the
Rimmersman. “You fight in battles, don’t you? What do you do when
somebody’s wounded—stare at them?”
   “That’s different,” the Duke said defensively. “Bandage ’em if they’re
bleeding. Carry ’em back on their shields if they’re dead.”
   “Well, that’s clever,” Miriamele snapped, but Simon saw a secret smile
tug at her lips. “And if they’re not bleeding or dead, I suppose you just step
over them? Never mind.” Isgrimnur closed his mouth and tugged at his
beard.
   The princess continued to wipe Simon’s forehead with her dampened
handkerchief. He couldn’t imagine what good it was doing, but for the
moment he was content to just lie back and be tended to. He knew that soon
enough he would have to explain himself to somebody.
   “I . . . I knew I recognized you, boy,” Isgrimnur said at last. “You were
the lad at Saint Hoderund’s, am I right? And that troll . . . I thought I
saw . . .”
   The pantry door opened wider. “Ah! Simon! I hope you are feeling more
of yourself now.”
   “Binabik,” Simon said, straining to sit up. Miriamele gently but firmly
leaned on his chest, forcing him back down. “I did see it, I did! That was
what I couldn’t remember! The hillside, and the fire, and . . . and . . .”
   “I know, friend Simon, I was understanding many things when you stood
up—not all things, however. There is still much unexplained in this riddle.”
   “They must think I’m a madman,” Simon groaned, pushing the princess’
hand away, but nevertheless enjoying the moment of contact. What was she
thinking? Now she was looking at him like a grown girl looked at a
troublesome younger brother. Damn girls and women both!
   “No, Simon,” Binabik said, crouching down beside Miriamele to look
him over carefully. “I have been telling many stories, our adventuring
together not least among them. Jarnauga has confirmed much that my
master was hinting at. He also received one of Morgenes’ last messages.
No, you are not thought mad, although I think still many are doubting the
real danger. Baron Devasalles especially, I am thinking.”
   “Ummm,” Isgrimnur scuffed a boot on the floor. “If the lad’s hale, I think
I’d better go back in. Simon, was it? Yes, well . . . you and I, we’ll talk
more.” The duke maneuvered his considerable bulk out of the narrow
pantry and clumped off down the hall.
   “And I will be going in, too,” Miriamele said, briskly chasing the worst
of the dust from her dress. “There are things that should not be decided
before I have been heard, whatever my uncle thinks.”
   Simon wanted to thank her, but could think of nothing to say while lying
on his back that would not make him feel more ridiculous than he presently
did. By the time he decided to throw over his pride, the princess had gone in
a swirl of silks.
   “And if you are recovered to sufficiency, Simon,” Binabik said,
extending a small, blunt hand, “then there are things we must hear in the
council hall, for I am thinking Naglimund has never seen a Raed quite the
like of this one.”

                                     •••

   “First of all, young one,” Jarnauga said, “while I believe all that you have
told us, you must know that it was not Ineluki you saw on that hillside.”
The fires had burned down to dreaming coals, but not a soul had left the
hall. “If you had seen the Storm King, in the form he must now wear, it
would have left you a blasted, mindless shell lying beside the Anger Stones.
No, what you saw—beside the pale Norns and Elias and his liegemen—was
one of the Red Hand. Even so, it seems miraculous to me that you came
away from such a night-vision whole in heart and mind.”
   “But . . . but . . .” As he began to remember what the old man had been
saying just before the wall of forgetfulness had crumbled, spilling the
memories of that horrible night—Stoning Night, the doctor had called it—
Simon was again puzzled and confused. “But I thought you said Ineluki and
his . . . Red Hand . . . were dead?”
   “Dead, yes; their earthly forms burnt away utterly in the last scorching
moments. But something survived: there was someone or something that
was able to recreate the sword Sorrow. Somehow—and it did not need your
experience to tell me, for this is indeed why the League of the Scroll was
made—Ineluki and his Red Hand survived: as living dreams or thoughts,
perhaps, shades held together only by hate, and by the terrible runes of
Ineluki’s last casting. But somehow the darkness that was Ineluki’s mind at
the very ending did not die.
   “King Eahlstan Fiskerne came three centuries later to the Hayholt, the
castle that stood upon the bones of Asu’a. Eahlstan was wise, and a seeker
after knowledge, and he found things in the ruins beneath the Hayholt that
made him aware that Ineluki had not been completely unmade. He formed
the League of which I am a member—and we are dwindling fast now, with
the loss of Morgenes and Ooqequk—so that old knowledge would not be
lost. Not only knowledge of the Sithi’s dark lord, but other things, too, for
those were evil times in the north of Osten Ard. Over the years it was
discovered, or rather guessed at, that somehow Ineluki, or his spirit or shade
or living will, had become manifest again among the only ones who might
welcome him.”
   “The Norns!” Binabik said, as if suddenly a bank of fog had been swept
away before him.
   “The Norns,” Jarnauga agreed. “I doubt that at first even the White Foxes
knew what he had become, but soon his influence in Sturmrspeik was
doubtless too great for anyone to say him nay. His Red Hand, too, has come
back with him, although in no form seen before on this earth.”
   “And we had thought that the Löken worshiped by the Black
Rimmersmen was only our own fire god, from heathen days,” said
Isgrimnur, wondering. “If I had known how far they had strayed from the
path of light . . .” He brushed his fingers against the Tree that hung upon his
neck. “Usires!” he breathed softly.
    Prince Josua, who had been listening silently for a long while, leaned
forward. “But why, if it is indeed this demon out of the past who is our
truest enemy, does he not show himself? Why does he play at cat’s-paw
with my brother Elias?”
    “Now we are coming to the place where my long years of study atop
Tungoldyr cannot be helpful,” Jarnauga shrugged. “I watched, and I
listened, and I watched, for that was what I was there to do—but what goes
on in the mind of such as the Storm King is more than I can guess at.”
    Ethelferth of Tinsett stood and cleared his throat. Josua nodded for him
to speak.
    “If all this is true . . . and my head is a-swimming with it all, I tell
you . . . then maybe . . . I can guess at the last.” He looked around, as
though expecting to be shouted down for his presumptuousness, but seeing
in the faces around him only worry and confusion, he cleared his throat
again and went on. “The Rimmersman,” he tilted his head toward old
Jarnauga, “said that it was our own Eahlstan Fiskerne who was first a-
noticing that this Storm King had come back. That was three hundred years
after Fingil took the Hayholt—or whatever was its name then. It’s been nigh
two hundred year since. It sounds to me as though this . . . demon, I
suppose, has taken a long time to get strong again.
    “Now,” he continued, “we all know, we men that’ve held land in the
midst of greedy neighbors,” he snuck a sly look over at Ordmaer, but the fat
baron had gone quite pale some time before, and seemed insensible to
innuendo, “that the best way to keep yourself safe, and purchase yourself
time to grow strong, is to have your neighbors fight each other. Seems to
me that’s what’s going on here. This Rimmersgard demon gives Elias a
present, then gets him a-fighting with his barons and dukes and such.”
Ethelferth looked around, hitched his tunic and sat down.
    “It’s not a ‘Rimmersgard demon,’” Einskaldir growled. “We’re shriven
Aedonite men.”
    Josua ignored the northerner’s comment. “There is truth to what you say,
Lord Ethelferth, but I think those who know Elias will agree that he also has
designs of his own.”
   “He didn’t need any Sithi demon to steal my land,” Isgrimnur said
bitterly.
   “Nevertheless,” Josua continued, “I find Jarnauga, and Binabik of
Yiqanuc . . . and young Simon, who was Doctor Morgenes’ apprentice . . .
all too uncomfortably trustworthy. I wish I could say I did not believe these
tales, I am not sure yet what I believe, but neither can I discount them.” He
turned to Jarnauga again, who was prodding at the nearest fire with an iron
poker. “If these dire warnings you bring are true, then tell me one thing:
what does Ineluki want?”
   The old man stared into the fire, then poked it again vigorously. “As I
said, Prince Josua, my task was to be the League’s eyes. Both Morgenes’
and young Binabik’s master knew more than I of what might lurk in the
mind of the Master of Stormspike.” He raised a hand as if to ward off more
questions. “If I had to guess, it would be to say this: think of the hatred that
kept Ineluki alive in the void, that brought him back from the fires of his
own death . . .”
   “What Ineluki wants then,” Josua’s voice fell heavily in the dark,
breathing hall, “is revenge?”
   Jarnauga only stared into the embers.
   “There is much to think on,” the master of Naglimund said, “and no
decisions to be lightly made.” He stood up, tall and pale, slender face a
mask before his hidden thoughts. “We shall return here tomorrow sunset.”
He went out, with a gray-cloaked guard on either side.
   In the hall men turned to look at each other, then rose, clustering in small
silent groups. Simon saw Miriamele, who had never had her chance to
speak, go out between Einskaldir and the limping Duke Isgrimnur.
   “Come, Simon,” Binabik said, tugging at his sleeve. “I think I will be
letting Qantaqa run, now the rains have gentled some. Of such things we
must take advantage. At this point I have still not been robbed of my liking
for thinking as I walk with wind in my face . . . and there is much that I
should be thinking.”
   “Binabik,” Simon said at last, the shocking, wearying day sitting heavily
upon him. “Do you remember the dream I had . . . we all had . . . in Geloë’s
house? Stormspike . . . and that book?”
   “Yes,” said the little man gravely. “That is one of the things I am
worrying with. The words, the words you saw, they catch at me. I am
fearing there is a dreadfully important riddle in them.”
   “Du . . . Du Swar . . .” Simon struggled with his muddled memories.
“Du . . .”
   “Du Svardenvyrd, it was,” Binabik sighed. “The Weird of the Swords.”




   The hot air beat painfully on Pryrates’ hairless and unprotected face, but
he would allow no discomfort to show on his features. As he strode across
the foundry floor, robes flapping, he was gratified to see the workmen,
themselves masked and heavily cloaked, stare and flinch at his passing.
Buoyant in the pulsing forge light, he chuckled as he briefly fancied himself
an arch-demon striding the tiles of Hell, petty underdevils scattering before
him.
   A moment later the mood fell away, and he scowled. Something had
happened to that little wretch of a wizard’s boy—Pryrates knew it. He had
felt it as clearly as if someone had jabbed him with some sharp thing. There
was some strange, tenuous bond still between them from Stoning Night; it
bit at him, and gnawed at his concentration. That night’s business had been
too important, too dangerous to bear any kind of interference. Now the boy
was thinking of that night again, probably telling all he knew to Lluth, or
Josua, or someone. Something serious needed to be done about that nasty,
prying boy.
   He stopped before the great crucible and drew himself up, arms folded
upon his chest. He stood that way for no little while, already angry, growing
angrier at the wait. At last one of the foundrymen hurried up and clumsily
bent a thick-breeched knee before him.
   “How can we serve you, Master Pryrates?” the man said, voice muffled
by the damp cloth wrapped across his lower face.
   The priest stared silently long enough to change the man’s partially-
revealed expression from discomfort to real fear.
   “Where is your overseer?” he hissed.
   “There, Father.” The man pointed to one of the dark openings in the
foundry-cavern wall. “One of the crank wheels be gone on the winch . . .
your Eminence.”
   Which was gratuitous, since he was still officially no more than a priest,
but the sound of it was not inharmonious.
   “Well . . . ?” Pryrates asked. The man did not respond, and Pryrates
kicked him hard on his leather-clad shin. “Get him, then!” he shrilled.
   With a head-wagging bow the man limped off, moving like a toddling
child in the padded clothes. Pryrates was aware of the beads of sweat
forming on his brow, and of the furnace-spewed air that seemed to bake his
lungs from the inside, but nevertheless a brief grin stretched his spare
features. He had felt worse things: God . . . or Whoever . . . knew he had
faced worse.
   At last the overseer came, huge and deliberate. His height, when he
finally shambled to a halt and stood looming over Pryrates, was almost
enough in itself to be regarded as an insult.
   “I suppose you know why I’ve come?” the priest said, black eyes
glittering, mouth taut with displeasure.
   “About the engines,” the other replied, voice quiet but childishly
petulant.
   “Yes about the siege engines!” Pryrates snapped. “Take off that damned
mask, Inch, so I can see you when I speak to you.”
   The overseer reached up a bristle-haired paw and peeled back the cloth.
His ruined face, rippled with burn scars around the empty right eye socket,
reinforced the priest’s sensation that he stood in one of the anterooms of the
Great Inferno.
   “The engines are not finished,” Inch said stubbornly. “Lost three men
when the big one collapsed Drorsday-last. Slow going.”
   “I know they’re not finished. Get more men. Aedon knows there are
enough slagging about the Hayholt. We’ll put some of the nobles to work,
let them get a few blisters on their fine hands. But the king wants them
finished. Now. He’s going into the field in ten days. Ten days, damn you!”
   Inch’s one eyebrow slowly rose, like a drawbridge. “Naglimund. He’s
going to Naglimund, isn’t he?” There was a hungry light in his eye.
   “That’s not for such as you to worry about, you scarred ape,” Pryrates
said contemptuously. “Just have them finished! You know why you were
given this loftier place—but we can take it back. . . .”
   Pryrates could feel Inch’s stare on him as he walked away, could feel the
man’s stonelike presence in the smoky, flickering light. He wondered again
whether it had been wise to let the brute live, and if not, whether he should
rectify the error.

                                     •••

   The priest had reached one of the broad stairheads, with hallways leading
left and right, and the next flight of steps ahead, when a dark figure abruptly
slid from the shadows.
   “Pryrates?”
   The priest, whose nerves were such that he might not have cried out if
struck with an axe, nevertheless felt his heart quicken.
   “Your majesty,” he said evenly.
   Elias, in unintended mockery of the foundrymen below, wore his black
cloak-hood pulled close around his face. He went that way always these
days, at least when he left his chambers—just as he always wore the
scabbarded sword. The gaining of that blade had brought the king power
such as few mortals had ever had, but it had not come without a price. The
red priest was wise enough to know that the reckoning of such bargains was
a very subtle science.
   “I . . . I cannot sleep, Pryrates.”
   “Understandable, my king. There are many burdens on your shoulders.”
   “You help me . . . with many. Have you been seeing to the siege
engines?”
   Pryrates nodded, then realized the hooded Elias might not see it in the
dark stairwell. “Yes, sire. I would like to roast Inch, that pig of an overseer,
over one of his own fires. But we will have them, sire, somehow.”
   The king was silent for a long while, stroking the hilt of the sword.
“Naglimund must be crushed,” Elias said at last. “Josua defies me.”
   “He is no longer your brother, sire, he is only your enemy,” Pryrates said.
   “No, no . . .” Elias said slowly, thinking deeply. “He is my brother. That
is why he cannot be allowed to defy me. That seems obvious to me. Is it not
obvious, Pryrates?”
   “Of course, your Majesty.”
   The king pulled his cloak tighter around him, as though to keep out a
cold wind, but the air that billowed up from below was thick with the heat
of the forges.
    “Have you found my daughter yet, Pryrates?” Elias asked suddenly,
looking up. The priest could faintly see the eye-gleam and shadow of the
king’s face in the cavern of his hood.
    “As I told you, sire, if she is not gone to Nabban, to her mother’s family
there—and our spies do not think so—then she is at Naglimund with
Josua.”
    “Miriamele.” The exhaled name drifted down the stone stairwell. “I must
have her back. I must!” The king extended an open hand, slowly closing it
into a fist before him. “She is the one piece of good flesh I shall save from
the broken shell of my brother’s house. The rest I shall tread into dust.”
    “You have the strength now, my king,” Pryrates said. “And you have
powerful friends.”
    “Yes.” The High King nodded slowly. “Yes, that is true. And what of the
huntsman Ingen Jegger? He has not found my daughter, but neither has he
returned. Where is he?”
    “He still hunts the wizard’s boy, Majesty. It has become something of
a . . . grudge.” Pryrates waved his hand, as though trying to banish the
uncomfortable memory of the Black Rimmersman.
    “A great deal of effort, it seems to me, has been spent trying to find this
boy who you say knows a few of our secrets.” The king frowned and spoke
harshly. “I wish as much trouble had been expended on my own flesh and
blood. I am not pleased.” For a moment his shadowed eyes glinted angrily.
He turned to go, then stopped.
    “Pryrates?” The king’s voice had changed again.
    “Yes, sire?”
    “Do you think I shall sleep better . . . when Naglimund is thrown down,
and I have my daughter back?”
    “I am sure, my king.”
    “Good. I shall enjoy it even more, knowing that.”
    Elias slipped away, up the shadowed corridor. Pryrates did not move, but
listened as the king’s retreating footsteps blended with the hammers of
Erkynland, whose clangor sounded monotonously in the deeps below.