
                         Forgotten Swords




Vorzheva was angry. The brush trembled in her hand, and the red line
trailed onto her chin.
   “See what I have done!” she said, irritation thickening her heavy
Thrithings accent. “You are cruel to rush me.” She blotted her mouth with a
kerchief and began again.
   “By the Aedon, woman, there are more important matters afoot than your
lip-painting.” Josua stood up and resumed his pacing.
   “Do not speak so to me, sir! And do not walk like that behind me . . .”
she waved her hand, searching for words, “. . . to and fro, to and fro. If you
must throw me out into the corridor like a camp follower, at least I will first
make myself ready.”
   The prince picked up a fire iron, then stooped to poke at the coals. “You
are not being ‘thrown into the corridor,’ my lady.”
   “If I am your lady,” Vorzheva scowled, “then why may I not stay? You
are ashamed of me.”
   “Because we will speak of things that are not your concern. If you have
not noticed, we are preparing for war. I’m sorry if that inconveniences you.”
He grunted and stood, laying the poker carefully back against the hearth.
“Go speak with the other ladies. Be glad you do not have to carry my
burdens.”
   Vorzheva spun to face him. “The other ladies hate me!” she said, eyes
narrowed, a lock of black hair dangling loose across her cheek. “I hear them
whispering about Prince Josua’s slut from the grasslands. And I hate them
—the northern cows! In my father’s march-land they would be whipped for
such . . . such . . .” she struggled with the still unfamiliar tongue, “. . . such
disrespect!” She took a breath to still her trembling.
   “Why are you so cold to me, sir?” she asked at last. “And why did you
bring me here, to this cold country?”
   The prince looked up, and for a moment his stern face softened. “I
sometimes wonder.” He slowly shook his head. “Please, if you despise the
company of the other court ladies, then go and have the harper sing for you.
Please. I will not have an argument tonight.”
   “Nor any night,” Vorzheva snapped. “You do not seem to want me at all
—but old things, yes, yes, those you are interested in! You and your old
books!”
   Josua’s patience was wearing thin. “The events we will speak of tonight
are old, yes, but their importance is to our current struggle. Damnation,
woman, I am a prince of the realm, and cannot evade my responsibilities!”
   “You do better at that than you think, Prince Josua,” she replied frostily,
throwing her cape about her shoulders.
   When she reached the doorway, she turned. “I hate the way you think
only of the past—old books, old battles, old history . . .” her lip curled, “old
loves.”
   The door swung closed behind her.




   “Thanks to you, Prince, for admitting us to your chambers,” Binabik
said. His round face was troubled. “I would not have been making such a
request had I not thought this important.”
   “Of course, Binabik,” the prince said. “I, too, prefer to talk in more quiet
surroundings.”
   The troll and old Jarnauga had pulled up hard wooden stools to sit beside
Josua at his table. Father Strangyeard, who had accompanied them, was
walking quietly around the room looking at the tapestries. In all his years at
Naglimund it was the first time he had been in the prince’s private
chambers.
   “I am still reeling from the things I heard last night,” Josua said, then
gestured at the sheets of parchment Binabik had strewn before him. “Now
you say there is even more I must know?” The prince gave a small, rueful
smile. “God must be chastising me, taking my nightmare of having to
command a castle at siege and then complicating it with all this.”
   Jarnauga leaned forward. “As long as you remember, Prince Josua, that it
is no nightmare we speak of, but a dark reality. We cannot any of us afford
the luxury of thinking this a fantasy.”
   “Father Strangyeard and I have been at days of searching in the castle
archives,” Binabik said, “since first I came, trying to find the meaning of
the Weird of the Swords.”
   “The dream, you mean, that you told me of?” Josua asked, idly thumbing
through the pages of writing on the table. “The one that you and the boy
had in the witch woman’s house?”
   “And not them alone,” Jarnauga declared, his eyes sharp as chips of blue
ice. “The nights before I left Tungoldyr I, too, dreamt of a great book. Du
Svardenvyrd was written upon it in letters of fire.”
   “I have heard of the priest Nisses’ book, of course,” the prince said,
nodding, “when I was a young student with the Usirean brothers. It was
infamous, but it no longer exists. Surely you are not going to tell me you
have found a copy here in our castle library?”
   “Not for the lack of our searching,” Binabik replied. “If it had been
anywhere but perhaps the Sancellan Aedonitis, here it would be.
Strangyeard has been assembling a library of great wonder.”
   “Very kind,” the archivist said, facing the wall as though studying a
tapestry so that his unseemly blush of pleasure would not imperil his
reputation as a levelheaded historian.
   “In fact, for all of Strangyeard’s and my hunting, it was Jarnauga who
has been partway solving our problem,” Binabik continued.
   The old man leaned forward and tapped a skinny finger on the
parchment. “It was a stroke of good fortune which I hope bodes well for us
all. Morgenes had sent once to ask me questions about Nisses—who was, of
course, a Rimmersman like myself—to help fill in some empty spots in his
written life of your father, King John. I was of little help, I’m afraid. I told
him what I knew. But I remembered his asking.”
    “And,” Binabik said, excited, “another stroke of luckiness: the one thing
young Simon saved from the destruction of Morgenes’ chambers was . . .
this book!” He grabbed a sheaf in his stubby brown hand and waved it.
“‘The Life and Reign of King John Presbyter, by Morgenes Ercestres’—
Doctor Morgenes of Erchester. In another way still, the doctor is with us
here!”
    “We owe him more than we can say,” Jarnauga pronounced solemnly.
“He saw the dark days coming, and made many preparations—some we
still do not know of.”
    “But the most important to this current moment,” the troll burst in, “is
this: his life of Prester John. Look!” He thrust the papers into Josua’s hand.
The prince leafed through them, then looked up, smiling faintly.
    “Reading Nisses’ tangled and archaic language puts me in mind of my
student days, prowling the archives of the Sancellan Aedonitis.” He shook
his head regretfully. “This is fascinating, of course, and I pray that I have
the time some day to read Morgenes’ full work, but I still do not
understand.” He held up the page he had been reading. “Here is a
description of the forging of the blade Sorrow, but I see no information that
Jarnauga has not already given to us. What help will this be?”
    Binabik, with Josua’s permission, took back the manuscript. “We must be
looking closer, Prince Josua,” he said. “Morgenes quotes from Nisses—and
the fact that he actually read at least some of Du Svardenvyrd only confirms
for me Morgenes’ resourcefulness—he quotes Nisses as speaking of two
other ‘Great Swords.’ Two more besides Sorrow. Here, let me read what
Morgenes tells are Nisses’ own words.”
    Binabik cleared his throat and began.

     “The first Great Sword came, in its form original, from out of the
  Sky one thousand years agone.
     “Usires Aedon. Whom we of Mother Church call the Son and
  Avatar of God, had hung for nine days and nights, nailed by His
  Hands and Feet to the Execution Tree in the square before the Temple
  of Yuvenis in Nabban. This Yuvenis was the heathen god of Justice,
  and the Nabbanai imperator was wont to hang such dyverse criminals
  as his courts convicted from the mighty branches of Yuvenis’ Tree. So
  hung Usires of the Lake, guilty of sacrilege and rebellion for
  proclaiming the Single God. Heels above Head like a carcase of Beef.
     “There came, that Ninth night, a great Roaring and a streak of fire,
  and a hurtling Bolt from the Heavens flew down from the sky and
  smote the Temple into a thousand shards, killing all the heathen
  judges and priests within. When the reek and fumes were dispersed,
  the Body of Usires Aedon was gone, and a great shout went up that
  God had restored Him to Heaven and punished His enemies, although
  others said that Usires’ patient disciples had cut down His body and
  escayped in the Confusion. These naysayers were quickly made silent,
  and the Word of the miracle spread throughout all the quarters of the
  City. Thus began the downfall of the pagan gods of Nabban.
     “In the smoaking rubble of the Temple there now lay a great and
  steaming Stone. It was proclaimed by the Aedonites that here was the
  heathen altar, melted by the vengeful Fires of the One God.
     “I, Nisses, believe instead that this was a flaming Star of the
  heavens fallen to Earth, as happens on Occasion.
     “Now, from this molten wrack was taken a great piece, and the
  Imperator’s swordwrights found it Workable, and the sky-metal was
  hammered into a great Blade. In mind of the scourging branches
  which had flaid Usires’ Back, the star-sword—as I suppose it to be—
  was named THORN, and a mighty power there was in it . . .”

   “Thus,” Binabik said, “the sword Thorn, being passed down through the
line of Nabbanai rulers, came at last to . . .”
   “To Sir Camaris, my father’s most beloved friend.” Josua finished. “The
stories of Camaris’ sword Thorn are many, but I had not known before
today where it came from . . . if Nisses is to be believed. This passage has
somewhat the smack of heresy.”
   “Those of his assertions which can be measured against truth measure
well, your Highness,” Jarnauga said, stroking his beard.
   “Still,” said Josua, “what does it mean? Camaris’ sword was lost when
he drowned.”
   “Allow me to share more of Nisses’ writing,” Binabik replied. “Here,
where he is speaking of the third part of our puzzle.”
     “The second of the Great Swords came from the Sea, traveling
  across the salt ocean from the West to Osten Ard.
     “For some years the Sea-Raiders had come seasonally to this land
  from the far, cold Country they called Ijsgard, only to return across the
  waves when their pillaging was done.
     “Then it was, some Tragedy or dire Happening in their native place
  caused the men of Ijsgard to abandon that land and bring their
  families in boats to Osten Ard, to settle in Rimmersgard in the North,
  the land of my Own far more recent birth.
     “When they had landed, their King Elvrit gave thanks to Udun and
  their other Heathenish gods, and commanded that the iron keel of his
  Dragon-boat should be made into a sword to protect his People in
  their new land.
     “Thus it went that the keel was given to the Dvernings, a Secretive
  and crafty race, and they separated out the Pure and Significant metal
  by means unknown, and smithied a long and shining blade.
     “But in the haggling over the payment King Elvrit and the master
  of the Dvernings fell out, and the king did slay the smith and took the
  sword unpayed-for, which was the cause of much later Woe.
     “In thought of their coming to this New country, Elvrit named the
  sword MINNEYAR, which means ‘Year of Memory.’”

   The troll finished, and walked to the table to drink from the water-ewer
there.
   “So, Binabik of Yiqanuc, two powerful swords,” Josua said. “Perhaps
this dreadful year has softened my mind, but I cannot think what
significance they have to us.”
   “Three swords,” Jarnauga offered, “counting Ineluki’s Jingizu—what we
call Sorrow. Three great swords.”
   “You must read this last part of Nisses’ book that Morgenes cited, Prince
Josua,” Strangyeard said, joining them at last. He picked up the parchments
that Binabik had laid on the table. “Here, please. This bit of rhyme from the
end of the madman’s writings.”

        “When frost doth grow on Claves’ bell . . .”
  Josua read aloud,

               “And Shadows walk upon the road
               When water blackens in the Well
               Three Swords must come again.

               When Bukken from the Earth do creep
               And Hunën from the heights descend
               When Nightmare throttles peaceful Sleep
               Three Swords must come again.

               To turn the stride of treading Fate
               To clear the fogging Mists of Time
               If Early shall resist Too Late
               Three Swords must come again . . .”

   “I think . . . I think I understand,” the prince said, with mounting interest.
“This almost appears to be a prophecy of our own day—as if Nisses
somehow knew that Ineluki would someday return.”
   “Yes,” Jarnauga said, combing his beard with his fingers as he looked
over Josua’s shoulder, “and apparently, if things are to be made right,
‘Three swords must come again.’”
   “Our understanding, Prince,” Binabik said, “is that if somehow the Storm
King can be defeated, it is by our finding the three swords.”
   “The three swords of which Nisses speaks?” Josua asked.
   “So it would seem.”
   “But, if what the boy Simon saw is correct, Sorrow is already in the
hands of my brother.” The prince frowned, his pale brow creased with the
lines of his thought. “If it were a simple thing to go and take it from him in
the Hayholt, we would not be cowering here in Naglimund.”
   “We shall worry about Sorrow last, Prince,” Jarnauga said. “We must
move now to secure the other two. I am named for my eyes and my trained
sight, but even I cannot see the future. Perhaps a way will come for us to
take Sorrow from Elias, or perhaps he will make some mistake. No, it is
Thorn and Minneyar we must now find.”
   Josua leaned back in his chair, crossing one ankle over the other and
pressing his fingers on his lidded eyes. “This is like a children’s story!” he
exclaimed. “How are mere men to survive such times? Chill winter in
Yuven-month . . . the risen Storm King who is a dead Sithi prince . . . and
now a desperate search for long-forgotten swords—madness! Folly!” He
opened his eyes and sat up. “But what can we do? I believe it all . . . so I
must be mad, too.”
   The prince stood up and began to pace. The others watched him, grateful
that despite the slenderness of their hope they had at least convinced Josua
of the grim, strange truth.
   “Father Strangyeard,” he said at last, “would you go and find Duke
Isgrimnur? I sent my pages and all others away so we would have privacy.”
   “Certainly,” the archivist said, and hurried from the room, robes flapping
on his lanky frame.
   “No matter what happens,” Josua said, “I will have much to explain at
tonight’s Raed. I would have Isgrimnur beside me. The barons know him as
a practical man, where I am still somewhat suspect for my years in Nabban
and my odd ways.” The prince smiled wearily. “If these mad things are true,
then our task is more complex than even it was. If the Duke of Elvritshalla
will stand behind me, then I think the barons will too—although I do not
think I will share this latest bit of information, even if it does represent a
thin shard of hope. I mistrust the ability of some of the lords to keep such
amazing things a secret.”
   The prince sighed. “It was bad enough to have Elias alone for an enemy.”
He stood, staring at the blazing hearth. His eyes glinted, as if full of some
reflecting moisture. “My poor brother.”
   Binabik looked up, startled by the prince’s tone.
   “My poor brother,” Josua said again. “He must be riding the nightmare
now in earnest—the Storm King! The White Foxes! I cannot think he knew
what he was doing.”
   “Somebody had knowledge of what they did, Prince,” the troll declared.
“Stormspike’s master and his minions do not, I am thinking, go dancing
house to house like peddlers, a-selling of their wares.”
   “Oh, I doubt not that Pryrates reached out to them somehow,” Josua said.
“I know him and his unholy thirst for forbidden knowledge from the old
days, in the seminary of the Usirean brothers.” He shook his head
sorrowfully. “But Elias, although brave as a bear, was always mistrustful of
secrets in old books, and scornful of scholarship. He also feared talk of
spirits or the demonic. He became worse after . . . after his wife died. I
wonder what he thought worth the terror he must reap for this bargain. I
wonder if he now regrets it—what terrible allies! Poor, foolish Elias. . . .”

                                    •••

   It was raining again, and when Strangyeard came back with the duke,
they were both soaked from their trip across the long courtyard. Isgrimnur
stood in the doorway of Josua’s chambers stamping like a nervous horse.
   “I was just seeing to my wife,” he explained. “She and the other women
left ahead of Skali’s arrival, and went to Thane Tonnrud, her uncle. She has
brought half a dozen of my men and a score of women and children. She’s
got the frostbite in her fingers, poor Gutrun.”
   “I am sorry to call you away from her, Isgrimnur, especially if she is
injured,” the prince apologized, rising and clasping the old duke’s hand.
   “Ah, there’s not much I can do. She has our girls to help her.” He
frowned, but there was pride in his voice. “She’s a strong woman. She made
strong sons for me.”
   “And we shall bring help to Isorn, your eldest, never fear.” Josua led
Isgrimnur to the table and handed him Morgenes’ manuscript. “It may be,
though, that we shall be fighting more than one battle.”
   When the duke had read of the Weird of the Swords, and asked some few
questions, he read the pages again.
   “This bit of rhyme, then?” he asked at last. “You think that’s the key to
the whole thing?”
   “If you mean the sort of key that locks a door,” Jarnauga said, “yes, we
hope so. For that is what we must do, it seems: find the swords of Nisses’
prophecy, swords that will keep the Storm King at bay.”
   “But your boy claimed Elias has the Sithi one—and in fact I saw him
wearing an unfamiliar sword when he told me I could leave for Elvritshalla.
A great, strange-looking thing it was.”
   “This we know, Duke,” Binabik chimed in. “It is the other two we must
first find.”
   Isgrimnur squinted suspiciously at the troll. “And what do you want from
me, little man?”
   “Only your help, in any way you can render it,” Josua said, reaching out
to pat the Rimmersman’s shoulder. “And Binabik of Yiqanuc is here for the
same reasons.”
   “Have you heard aught of the fate of Minneyar, Elvrit’s sword?”
Jarnauga asked. “I confess I should know, since it is the purpose of our
League to gather such wisdom, but Minneyar has gone out of the tales we
know.”
   “I know this from my grandmother, who was a storyteller,” Isgrimnur
said, chewing his mustache as he remembered. “It went through Elvrit’s line
to Fingil Redhand, and from Fingil to his son Hjeldin, and then when
Hjeldin fell from the tower—with Nisses dead on the floor behind him—
Hjeldin’s lieutenant Ikferdig took it, along with Fingil’s crown of the
Rimmersmen, and the mastery of the Hayholt.”
   “Ikferdig died in the Hayholt,” Strangyeard said shyly, warming his
hands at the hearth. “‘The Burned King,’ he is called in my books.”
   “Dead by the dragon-fire of red Shurakai,” Jarnauga said. “Roasted in his
throne room like a coney.”
   “So . . .” Binabik said thoughtfully, while gentle Strangyeard shivered at
Jarnauga’s words, “Minneyar is either within the walls of the Hayholt
somewhere. . . . or it has been unmade by the red dragon’s fiery breathing.”
   Josua stood up and walked to the fireplace, where he stood staring into
the wavering flames. Strangyeard inched away so as not to crowd his
prince.
   “Two confounding and unhappy alternatives,” Josua said, and grimaced,
turning to Father Strangyeard. “You have brought me no good news today,
you wise men.” At this, the archivist looked morose. “First you tell me our
only hope is to find this trio of legendary blades, and now you say that two
of them are in the stronghold of my enemy brother—if they exist at all.”
The prince sighed in dismay. “What of the third? Does Pryrates use it to cut
his beef at table?”
   “Thorn,” Binabik said, climbing up to perch on the table’s edge. “The
sword of the great knight who was Camaris.”
   “Made from the star-stone which destroyed the temple of Yuvenis in old
Nabban,” Jarnauga said. “But surely it went into the sea with great Camaris,
when he was swept overboard in the Bay of Firannos.”
   “You see!” spat Josua. “Two held by my brother, and the third in the
even tighter grip of the jealous ocean. We are cursed before we begin.”
   “It no doubt would have also seemed an impossible chance that
Morgenes’ work would have survived the destruction of him and his
chambers,” Jarnauga said, and his voice was stern, “and then would come
safely through danger and despair to us here, so we could read Nisses’
prophecy. But it did survive. And it did reach us. There is always hope.”
   “Excuse me, Prince, but there seems only one thing to do,” Binabik said,
nodding sagely atop the table. “It is back to the archives and searching
again, until we find the answer to the riddle of Thorn and the other blades.
And we must be finding it soon.”
   “Soon indeed,” said Jarnauga, “for we are wasting diamond-precious
time.”
   “By all means,” said Josua, pulling his chair over by the hearth and
slumping down into it, “by all means make haste, but I deeply fear that our
time has already run out.”




   “Damn and damn and damn,” Simon said, hurling yet one more rock
from the battlement into the teeth of the wind. Naglimund seemed to stand
in a great expanse of soapy gray nothingness, a mountain sprouting from a
sea of swirling rain. “Damn,” he added, as he bent to search for another on
the wet stone wall.
   Sangfugol looked over, his fine cap a limp, sodden mass on his head.
“Simon,” he said crossly, “you cannot have it both ways. First you curse
them all for dragging you along behind them like a peddler’s sack, then you
blaspheme and hurl stones because you are not invited to the afternoon’s
deliberations.”
   “I know,” Simon said, sending another projectile down from the castle
walls. “I don’t know what I want. I don’t know anything.”
   The harper scowled. “What I would like to know is: what are we doing
up here? Are there not better places to feel miserable and left out? It is cold
as a well digger’s privy parts on these battlements.” He allowed his teeth to
chatter for a moment, hoping to inspire pity. “Why are we up here?”
    “Because it clears a man’s head, a little wind and rain,” Towser called,
making his way back along the battlement toward his two companions.
“There is no better cure for a night of drinking.” The little old man winked
at Simon, who guessed that Towser would have gone down long ago, but
for the enjoyable sight of Sangfugol shivering in his beautiful gray velvet
robe.
    “Well,” the harper growled, miserable as a soaked cat, “you drink like a
man in his youth, Towser—or in his second childhood—thus, I suppose it is
no surprise to see you prance on the walls for fun, just like a rascally boy.”
    “Ah, Sangfugol,” Towser said with a wrinkly smile, watching another of
Simon’s missiles send up a gout of water from the rain-pocked pond that
eddied where the commons yard had been, “you are too . . . Ho!” Towser
pointed. “Is that not Duke Isgrimnur? I had heard he was returned. Ho,
Duke!” The jester shouted and waved at the stout figure. Isgrimnur,
squinting against the slanting raindrops, looked up. “Duke Isgrimnur! It’s
Towser!”
    “Is that who it is?” the Duke cried. “Damn me, it is, you old whoreson!”
    “Come up, come up!” Towser said. “Come and tell me what is the
news!”
    “I shouldn’t be amazed,” Sangfugol said sardonically as the duke angled
across the submerged commons toward the curling staircase in the wall.
“The only person beside an old madman who would come up of his free
will would be a Rimmersman. It’s probably even too warm for him, since
it’s not actually sleeting or snowing.”
    Isgrimnur had a tired smile and a nod for Simon and the harper, then
turned and clasped the jester’s veined hand and gave him a comradely
smack on the shoulder. He was so much taller and bulkier than Towser that
he looked like a mother bear cuffing her cub.
    While the duke and the jester exchanged tidings, Simon threw stones and
listened, and Sangfugol stood with a look of patient, hopeless suffering.
Soon, unsurprisingly, the Rimmersman’s talk came around from mutual
friends and homely things to darker topics. As Isgrimnur spoke of the
gathering threat of war, and the shadow in the north, Simon felt the cold
that the chill winds had—strangely—helped dispel for a while come
shouldering back. When the duke began to speak in hushed tones of the
Ruler of the North, then sheared off, saying some things were too fear-
fraught to speak of openly, the cold seemed to slide further into Simon’s
being. He stared out into the murky distance, at the dark fist of storm that
hovered beyond the rain on the northern horizon, and felt himself slipping
back into his journey on the dream-road . . .
   . . . The naked thrust of the stone mountain, its halo of indigo and yellow
flames. The silver-masked queen in her icy throne, and the chanting voices
in the rocky fastness . . . Black thoughts pressed down on him, crushing him
like the rim of a broad wheel. It would be so easy, he was sure, to go
forward into the darkness, into the warmth beyond the storm’s chill . . .
   . . . It’s so close . . . so close . . .
   “Simon!” a voice said in his ear. A hand grasped his elbow. He looked
down, startled, to see the edge of the battlement inches from his foot, and
the wind-lashed water of the courtyard directly below.
   “What are you doing?” Sangfugol asked, giving his arm a shake. “If you
went over this little wall, you would have more than broken bones.”
   “I was . . .” Simon said, feeling a dark mist still clouding his thoughts, a
mist that was slow to clear, “I . . .”
   “Thorn?” Towser said loudly, responding to something Isgrimnur had
said. Simon turned to see the little jester tugging at the Rimmersman’s cloak
like an importunate child. “Thorn, did you say? Well, then, why did you not
come to me immediately? Why not come to old Towser? I know all there is
to know, if anybody does!”
   The old man turned to Simon and the harper. “Why, who was with our
John longer than anyone? Who? I was, of course. Joked and tumbled and
played for him sixty years. And the great Camaris, too. I saw him come to
the court.” He turned back around to face the duke, and there was a light in
his eyes that Simon had not seen before. “I am the man you want,” Towser
said proudly. “Quick! Take me to Prince Josua.”
   The bandy-legged old jester almost seemed to dance, so light were his
steps as he led the somewhat dumbfounded Rimmersman toward the stairs.
   “Thank God and His angels,” said Sangfugol, watching them go. “I
suggest we go immediately to pour something inside us—a wetness within
to make up for the wetness without.”
   He led Simon, who was still shaking his head, down from the rainy
battlements into the echoing, torch-lit stairwell, out of the northern winds
for a little while and into the warmth.




   “We understand your place in these events, good Towser,” Josua said
impatiently. The prince, perhaps to ward off the all-pervasive chill, had
wrapped a woolen scarf tightly around his throat. The tip of his slender nose
was pink.
   “I’m just setting the place, so to speak, your Highness,” Towser said
complacently. “If I might have a cup of wine to help ease the talk, I will get
to the main course directly.”
   “Isgrimnur,” Josua groaned, “would you be good enough to find our
venerable jester something to drink, or I fear we shall be here until
Aedontide waiting for the rest of the story.”
   The duke of Elvritshalla went to the cedar cabinet beside Josua’s table
and found a ewer of red Perdruin wine. “Here,” he said, handing a filled
flagon to Towser, who sipped and smiled.
   It’s not the wine he’s wanting, the Rimmersman thought, it’s the attention.
These are grim enough days for the young and useful, let alone for an old
trickster whose master is two years dead.
   He stared at the jester’s seamed face, and for a moment thought he saw
the child’s countenance trapped beneath, as behind a thin curtain.
   God grant me a quick, honorable death, Isgrimnur prayed, and never let
me be one of those old fools who sits by the campfire telling the young men
that things will never be as good as they once were. Still, he thought as he
moved back to his chair, listening to the lupine howling of the winds
outside, still, it may be true this time. Maybe we have seen the better days.
Maybe there is nothing left now but a losing battle against creeping
darkness.
   “You see,” Towser was saying, “Camaris’ sword Thorn didn’t go with
him into the ocean. He had given it over for safekeeping to his squire,
Colmund of Rodstanby.”
    “Gave away his sword?” Josua said, puzzled. “That accords with none of
the stores I have ever heard of Camaris-sá-Vinitta.”
    “Ah, but you did not know him that last year . . . and how could you,
since you had only just come into the world?” Towser took another swig
and stared meditatively up at the ceiling. “Sir Camaris grew strange and fell
after your mother Queen Ebekah died. He was her special protector, you
know, and he worshiped the very tiles she trod upon—as if she were Elysia
the Mother of God herself. I always thought he blamed himself for her
death, as though he could somehow have cured her ill-health by force of
arms, or by the purity of his heart . . . poor idiot.”
    Seeing Josua’s impatience, Isgrimnur leaned forward. “So he gave the
star-sword Thorn to his squire?”
    “Yes, yes,” said the old man testily, not liking to be rushed. “When
Camaris was lost in the sea off Harcha-island, Colmund took it for his own.
He went back and reclaimed his family’s lands at Rodstanby in the
Frostmarch, and became the baron of a good-sized province. Thorn was a
famous weapon through all the world, and when his enemies saw it—for it
was unmistakable, all shiny black but for the silver hilt, a beautiful, perilous
thing—they would none of them face him. He seldom even had to draw it
from its scabbard.”
    “So it is then at Rodstanby?” Binabik said excitedly from the corner.
“That is near within two days’ ride from where we are now sitting!”
    “No, no, no,” growled Towser, waving his flagon for Isgrimnur to fill
again. “If you would only wait, troll, I will tell you all.”
    Before Binabik or the prince or anyone else could respond, Jarnauga
stood up from his crouch by the fire and leaned toward the little jester.
“Towser,” he said, and his voice was as hard and cold as ice in the roof
thatches, “we cannot wait on your pace. There is a grave darkness spreading
from the north, a cold and fatal shadow. We must have the sword, do you
understand?” He brought his sharp face even closer to Towser’s, and the
little man’s tufted eyebrows shot upward in alarm. “We must find Thorn, for
soon the Storm King himself will be knocking at our door. Do you
understand?”
    Towser gaped as Jarnauga dropped back into his long-limbed squat
beside the hearth.
   Well, Isgrimnur mused, if we wanted the latest news shouted all over
Naglimund, now we’ll have it done. Still, it does look as though he’s put a
bit of a burr under Towser’s saddle.
   It took a few moments for the jester to be able to tear his startled,
fascinated eyes from the glare-eyed northerner. When he turned, he no
longer looked to be enjoying his status quite as much.
   “Colmund,” he began, “Sir Colmund heard traveler’s tales of the dragon
Igjarjuk’s legendary hoard, in the heights of the mountain Urmsheim. It was
a treasure said to be richer than any other in the wide world.”
   “Only a flatlander would be thinking of searching out a mountain dragon
—and for gold!” Binabik said disgustedly. “My people have long lived near
Urmsheim, and we are living long because we are not going there.”
   “But you see,” old Towser said, “the dragon has been only a story for
generations. No one has seen it, no one has heard of it . . . except for snow-
maddened wanderers. And Colmund had the sword Thorn, a magic sword
to lead him on a quest for a magic dragon’s hoard!”
   “But what idiocy!” Josua said. “Did he not have everything he wanted?
A powerful barony? The sword of a hero? Why should he go rabbiting off
after such a madman’s vision?”
   “Damn me, Josua,” Isgrimnur swore, “why do men do any of the things
they do? Why did they hang Our Lord Usires topsides-down from the Tree?
Why should Elias imprison his brother and make bargains with demons
when he is already High King of all Osten Ard?”
   “There are indeed things in men and women that make them reach for
what is beyond their grasp,” Jarnauga said from his hearth corner.
“Sometimes the things they seek lie beyond the bounds of understanding.”
   Binabik jumped lightly to the floor. “Too much talk is this of things we
can never know,” he said. “Our question still is: where is the sword? Where
is Thorn?”
   “Lost in the north, I’m sure,” Towser said. “I have never heard that Sir
Colmund came back from his quest. One traveler’s tale was that he had
made himself a king of the Hunën, and lives there still in a fortress of ice.”
   “It sounds as though his story has been muddied and mixed with old
memories of Ineluki,” Jarnauga said thoughtfully.
   “He made it as far as the monastery of Saint Skendi at Vestvennby,”
Father Strangyeard piped up unexpectedly from the back of the room. He
had gone out quickly and come back without anyone’s noticing; he wore a
faint flush of pleasure high on his thin cheeks. “Towser’s words sparked a
memory. I thought I had some of the monastic books of Skendi’s order,
salvaged from its burning during the Frostmarch wars. Here is the
household ledger for the Founding-year 1131. See, it lists the outfitting of
Colmund’s party.” He passed it proudly to Josua, who held it up to the
firelight.
    “Dried meat and fruits,” Josua read, straining to make out the faded
words. “Wool cloaks, two horses . . .” He looked up. “It says here a party of
‘a dozen and one’—thirteen.” He passed the book on to Binabik, who took
it back to pore over with Jarnauga by the fire.
    “Then they must have run into bad luck,” Towser said, refilling his
flagon. “The stories I heard said he set out from Rodstanby with over two
dozen of his hand-picked best.”
    Isgrimnur was staring after the troll. He’s certainly clever enough, the
Rimmersman thought, although I don’t trust him or his kind much. And
what’s his hold on that boy? I’m not sure I like that either, although I think
the stories they both tell are largely true.
    “What good is all this to us now?” he said aloud. “If the sword is lost, it
is lost, and we must simply make the best of our defenses here.”
    “Duke Isgrimnur,” Binabik said, “you are not understanding, perhaps:
there is no choice for us. If indeed the Storm King is our greater enemy—as
I think we are all agreeing, now—then the only thing for hope, it seems, is
that we acquire the three swords. Two are for now denied from us. That
leaves Thorn, and we must find it—if finding is possible.”
    “Don’t instruct me, little man,” Isgrimnur growled, but Josua waved his
hand wearily to forestall their argument.
    “Quiet now,” the prince said. “Please, let me think. My brain is fevered
with so many madnesses heaped one atop the other. I need some moments
of quiet.”
    Strangyeard, Jarnauga, and Binabik pored over the monastery ledger and
Morgenes’ manuscript, talking in whispers; Towser finished his wine,
Isgrimnur sipping moodily beside him. Josua sat staring into the fire. The
prince’s weary features looked like parchment pulled over bone; the Duke
of Elvritshalla could hardly bear to look at him.
   His father looked no worse in his last dying days, Isgrimnur brooded.
Has he the strength to lead us through a siege, as it looks to come to soon?
Has he even the strength himself to survive? He has ever been a thinker, a
worrier . . . although, in fairness, he is no slouch with sword and shield.
Without thinking he got up and stumped over to the prince’s side, laying an
ursine paw on Josua’s shoulder.
   The prince looked up. “Can you spare me a good man, old friend? Do
you have one who knows the northeast country?”
   Isgrimnur looked thoughtful. “I have two or three. Frekke, though, is too
old for a journey such as I imagine you are thinking of. Einskaldir would
not leave my side unless I pushed him out the gate of Naglimund at spear-
point. Besides, I have a mind we will need his fierceness here, when the
fighting grows hot and bloody. He is a badger: fierce-blooded, and best
when he is backed into a hole.” The duke mused. “Of the rest, I would give
you Sludig. He is young and fit, but he is also clever. Yes, Sludig will be the
man for you.”
   “Good.” Josua nodded his head slowly. “I have some three or four I will
send, but a small party is better than a large.”
   “For what, exactly?” Isgrimnur looked around the room, at its sparse
solidity, and wondered again whether they were chasing phantoms, whether
the wintry weather had somehow chilled their better judgement.
   “To search for Camaris’ sword, Uncle Bear-skin,” the prince said with a
ghost of a smile. “It is doubtless madness, and we have nothing better to go
on than old stories and a few faded words in old books, but it is not a
chance we can afford to ignore. It is storm-fraught winter in the summer
month of Yuven. None of our doubts can change that.” He looked around
the room, mouth pursed in thought.
   “Binabik of Yiqanuc,” he called at last, and the troll hurried over. “Will
you lead a party on the trail of Thorn? You know the northern mountains
better than anyone here except perhaps Jarnauga, who I hope will go, too.”
   “I would be full of honor, Prince,” Binabik said, and dropped to one
knee. Even Isgrimnur was forced to grin.
   “I am honored, too, Prince Josua,” Jarnauga said, rising, “but I think it is
not to be. Here at Naglimund I will best serve. My legs are old, but my eyes
are still keen. I will help Strangyeard in the archives, for there are many
questions still to answer, many riddles behind the story of the Storm King,
and the whereabouts of Fingil’s sword Minneyar. And there may yet be
other ways I can serve, as well.”
    “Your Highness,” Binabik asked, “if there is a place unfilled, may I have
your permission to take young Simon? Morgenes was asking as his last
wish that the boy be watched over by my master. With Ookequk’s death I
am master now, and would not be shirking this watching-over.”
    Josua looked skeptical. “And you would look after him by taking him on
a mad expedition into the unmapped north?”
    Binabik raised an eyebrow. “Unmapped by big people, perhaps. It is the
commons yard of my Qanuc-folk. Also, is it more safe to leave him shut up
in a castle set for warring with the High King?”
    The prince brought his long hand up to his face, as though his head
pained him. “You are right, I suppose. If these slender threads of hope come
to naught, there will be no safe places for those who have sided with the
Lord of Naglimund. If the boy wishes to go, you may take him.” He
brought his hand down and clasped Binabik’s shoulder. “Very well, little
man—little but brave. Go back to your books, and I shall send you three
good Erkynlanders and Isgrimnur’s man Sludig in the morning.”
    “My thanks, Prince Josua,” Binabik nodded. “But I think it is at night
tomorrow we should be leaving. We will be a small party, and our best hope
is in not attracting evil attention.”
    “So be it,” said Josua, rising and lifting his hand as though in
benediction. “Who knows if this is some fool’s errand or the rescue of us
all? You should be going out amid trumpets and applause. Instead necessity
must override honor, and stealth must be the watchword. Know that our
thoughts are with you.”
    Isgrimnur hesitated, then leaned forward and clasped Binabik’s small
hand. “Damned strange this is,” he said, “but God be with you. If Sludig
should get contentious, be forgiving. He is high-spirited, but his heart is
good and his loyalty strong.”
    “Thank you, Duke,” the troll said seriously. “May your god be blessing
us indeed. We go into unknown places.”
    “As do all mortals,” Josua added. “Sooner or later.”
   “What! You told the prince and everyone I would go where?” Simon
balled his fists in anger. “What right did you have to do that?!”
   “Simon-friend,” Binabik calmly responded. “You are under no order to
go. I was only asking Josua’s permission for your being on this search, and
it was granted. The choosing is for you.”
   “S’bloody Tree! What else can I do now? If I say no, everyone will think
I’m a coward!”
   “Simon.” The little man put on a look of patience. “First, please do not
be using your new-learned soldier curses on me. We Qanuc are a courteous
folk. For second, it is not good worrying so on other’s opinions. Anyway,
staying at Naglimund will certainly not be for cowards.”
   Simon hissed a great frosty cloud of breath and hugged himself. He
stared up at the murky sky, at the dull blur of sun secreted behind the
clouds.
   Why are people always making decisions for me without asking first? Am
I a child?
   He stood for some moments, red-faced from more than the chill, until
Binabik reached out a small, gentle hand.
   “My friend, I am sorrowful this was not the honor I was hoping it to be—
an honor of dreadful, dreadful danger, of course, but an honor. I have
explained of what importance we think this quest, of how the fate of
Naglimund and all the north may hang on its accomplishing. And, of
course, that all may be perishing without fame or song in the white northern
waste.” He patted Simon’s knuckles solemnly, then reached into the pocket
of his fur-lined jacket. “Here,” he said, and put something hard and cold
into Simon’s fingers.
   Momentarily distracted, he opened his hand to look. It was a ring, a
plain, thin circlet of some golden metal. On it was inscribed a simple
design: a long oval with a tipped triangle at one end.
   “The fish sign of the League of the Scroll,” Binabik said. “Morgenes tied
this thing to the sparrow’s leg, along with the note of which I was speaking
before. The end of the note told this was for you.”
   Simon held it up, trying to catch a gleam of the dull sunlight. “I never
saw Morgenes wear it,” he said, a little surprised that it startled up no
memories. “Do all the League members have one? Besides, how could I be
worthy to wear it? I can hardly read. My spelling isn’t very good, either.”
    Binabik smiled. “My master did not have such a ring, or at least I never
was seeing it. As for the other: Morgenes was wanting you to have it, and
that is permission enough, I have sureness.”
    “Binabik,” Simon said, squinting, “it has writing on the inside.” He held
it up for the troll to inspect. “I can’t read it.”
    The troll narrowed his eyes. “It is writing in some Sithi tongue,” he said,
turning the ring to peruse its inner rim, “hard to read for being very small,
and in a style I do not know.” He studied it a moment longer.
    “‘Dragon,’ that character means,” Binabik read at last. “And this one
means, I believe, ‘death’ . . . ‘Death and the Dragon’? . . . ‘Death of the
Dragon’?” He looked up at Simon, grinned and shrugged. “What it might
be meaning, I have no idea. My knowledge is not deep enough. Some
conceit of your doctor’s, is my guessing—or perhaps a family motto.
Perhaps Jarnauga could read it with more ease.”
    It slid easily onto the third finger of Simon’s right hand, as though it had
been made for him. Morgenes had been so small! How could he have worn
this?
    “Do you think it’s a magic ring?” he asked suddenly, narrowing his eyes
as though he might detect spells swarming around the golden circle like
minuscule bees.
    “If so,” Binabik said, mock-somberly, “Morgenes included no
grammarye for explaining its using.” He shook his head. “I think it not a
likelihood. A keepsake, from a man who was caring for you.”
    “Why are you giving it to me now?” Simon asked, feeling a certain
sorrowful tightness behind his eyes that he was determined to resist.
    “Because I must be leaving tomorrow night to go north. If you decide for
remaining here, we might not have opportunity to meet again.”
    “Binabik!” The tightening increased. He felt like a small child pushed
back and forth between bullying elders.
    “The truth it is, only.” The troll’s round face was entirely serious now. He
raised his hand to forestall more protests and questions. “Now you must be
deciding, my good friend. I go into the snow and ice country, on an errand
that may be foolishness, and which may claim the lives of the fools who are
following it. Those who remain are facing the anger of a king’s army. An
evil choosing, I fear.” Binabik nodded his head gravely. “But, Simon,
whichever it is for you, going north or staying to fight for Naglimund—and
princess—we will be the best of comrades still, yes?”
   He stood on tiptoe to clap Simon on the upper arm, then turned and
walked away across the courtyard toward the archives.

                                     •••

   Simon found her standing alone, tossing pebbles into the castle well. She
wore a heavy traveling cloak and hood against the cold.
   “Hello, Princess,” he said. She looked up and smiled, sadly. For some
reason she seemed much older today, like a grown woman.
   “Welcome, Simon.” Her breath made a halo of mist about her head.
   He began to bend his knee in a bow, but she was no longer looking.
Another stone rattled down the well. He considered sitting down, which
seemed the natural thing to do, but the only place to sit was the edge of the
well, which would either put him uncomfortably close to the princess or
leave him facing in the wrong direction. He decided to remain on his feet.
“And how have you been?” he said at last. She sighed.
   “My uncle treats me as though I am made of eggshells and cobwebs—
like I would shatter if I lifted anything, or if anyone bumped into me.”
   “I’m sure . . . I’m sure that he is only worried for your safety, after the
dangerous journey you had to get here.”
   “The dangerous journey we had, but nobody’s following you around to
make sure you don’t skin your knee. They’re even teaching you how to
fight with a sword!”
   “Miri . . . Princess!” Simon was more than a little shocked. “You don’t
want to fight with swords, do you?!”
   She looked up at him, and their eyes met. For an instant her stare burned
like the noonday sun with some inexplicable longing; a moment later she
wearily dropped her gaze again.
   “No,” she said, “I suppose not. But, oh, I do wish to do something!”
   Surprised, he heard the real pain in her voice, and in that moment
remembered her as she had been on the flight up the Stile, uncomplaining
and strong, as good a companion as could be wished.
   “What . . . what do you want to do?”
   She looked up again, pleased by the serious tone of his question. “Well,”
she began, “it’s no secret that Josua is having trouble convincing Devasalles
that his master Duke Leobardis should support the prince against my father.
Josua could send me to Nabban!”
   “Send you . . . to Nabban?”
   “Of course, you idiot.” She frowned. “On my mother’s side I am of the
Ingadarine House, a very noble family of Nabban. My aunt is married to
Leobardis! Who better to go and convince the duke!?” She clapped her
gloved hands for emphasis.
   “Oh . . .” Simon was unsure of what to say. “Perhaps Josua thinks that it
would be . . . would be . . . I don’t know.” He considered. “I mean to say,
should the High King’s daughter be the one to . . . to arrange alliances
against him?”
   “And who knows the High King’s ways better?” Now she was angry.
   “Do you . . .” He hesitated, but his curiosity won out. “How do you feel
toward your father?”
   “Do I hate him?” Her tone was bitter. “I hate what he has become. I hate
what the men around him have put him up to. If he would suddenly find
goodness in his heart, and see the error of his ways . . . well, then I would
love him again.”
   A whole procession of stones went down the well as Simon stood
uncomfortably by.
   “I’m sorry, Simon,” she said at last. “I have become very bad at talking
with people. My old nurse would be shocked at how much I have forgotten,
running around in the forest. How are you, and what have you been doing?”
   “Binabik has asked me to go with him on a mission for Josua,” he said,
bringing the subject up more abruptly than he had meant to. “To the north,”
he added significantly.
   Instead of showing the expressions of worry and fear he had expected,
the princess’ face seemed to light up from within; although she smiled at
him, she did not truly seem to see him. “Oh, Simon,” she said, “how brave.
How fine. Can you . . . when do you leave?”
   “Tomorrow night,” he said, dimly aware that somehow, by some
mysterious process, asked to go had become going. “But I haven’t decided
yet,” he said feebly. “I thought I might be more needed here, at Naglimund
—to wield a spear on the walls.” He tacked on the last just in case there was
any possibility she thought he might be staying behind to work in the
kitchens, or something like.
   “Oh, but Simon,” Miriamele said, reaching up suddenly to take his cold
hand in her leather-gloved fingers. “If my uncle needs you to do it, you
must! We have so little hope left, from all I have heard.”
   She reached up to her neck and quickly unfastened the sky-blue scarf she
wore, a slender gauzy strip; she handed it to him. “Take this and bear it for
me,” she said. Simon felt the blood come roaring up into his cheeks, and
struggled to keep his lips from stretching into a shocked, mooncalfish grin.
   “Thank you . . . Princess,” he said at last.
   “If you wear it,” she said, standing up, “it will be almost as though I were
there myself.” She did a funny little dance step, and laughed.
   Simon was trying without success to understand what exactly had
happened, and how it had happened so fast. “It will be, princess,” he said.
“Like you were there.”
   Something in the way he said it tripped up her sudden mood: her
expression turned sober, even sad. She smiled again, a slower, more rueful
smile, then quickly stepped forward, startling Simon so that he almost
raised a hand to ward her off. She brushed his cheek with her cool lips.
   “I know you will be brave, Simon. Come back safely. I shall pray for
you.”
   Immediately she was gone, running across the courtyard like a little girl,
her dark cape a smoky swirl as she disappeared into the twilit archway.
Simon stood holding her scarf. He thought of it, and her smile when she
kissed his cheek, and he felt something smolder into flame inside of him. It
seemed, in some way he did not fully understand, that a single torch had
been lit against the vast gray chill looming in the north. It was only a single
point of brightness in a dreadful storm . . . but even a lone fire could bring a
traveler home safe.
   He rolled the soft cloth into a ball and slipped it into his shirt.




   “I am glad you have come so quickly,” Lady Vorzheva said. The
brilliance of her yellow dress seemed reflected in her dark eyes.
    “My lady honors me,” the monk replied, his eyes straying about the
room.
    Vorzheva laughed harshly. “You are the only one who thinks it honorable
to visit me. But no matter. You understand what it is you must do?”
    “I am sure that I have it correctly. It is a matter difficult in execution, but
easily grasped in concept.” He bowed his head.
    “Good. Then wait no longer, for the more wait, the less chance of
success. Also more chance for tongues to wag.” She whirled away to the
back chamber in a rush of silks.
    “Uh . . . my lady?” The man blew on his fingers. The prince’s chambers
were cold, the fire unlit. “There is the matter of . . . payment?”
    “I thought you did this as honor for me, sir?” Vorzheva called from the
back room.
    “Welladay, madam, I am but a poor man. What you ask will take
resources.” He blew on his fingers again, then thrust his hands deep into his
robe.
    She came back bearing a purse of shiny cloth. “That I know. Here. It is in
gold, as I promised—half now, half when I receive proof that your task is
completed.” She handed him the purse, then drew back. “You stink of wine!
Is that the sort of man you are, trusted with this grave task?”
    “It is the sacramental wine, my lady. Sometimes on my difficult road it is
the only thing to drink. You must understand.” He favored her with a
diffident smile, then made the sign of the Tree over the gold before stowing
it in the pocket of his robe. “We do what we must to serve God’s will.”
    Vorzheva nodded slowly. “That I can understand. Do not fail me, sir. You
serve a great purpose, and not just for me.”
    “I understand, Lady.” He bowed, then turned and left. Vorzheva stood
and stared at the parchments strewn on the prince’s table and let out a deep
breath. The thing was done.




   Twilight of the day after he spoke to the princess found Simon in the
chambers of Prince Josua, preparing to say farewell. In a sort of daze, as
though he had just awakened, he stood listening as the prince had his final
words with Binabik. The boy and the troll had spent the whole of the dark
day preparing their kit, obtaining a new fur-lined cloak and helmet for
Simon, along with a light mail shirt to wear beneath his outer clothing. The
coat of thin ringlets, Haestan had pointed out, would not save him from a
direct sword blow or an arrow to the heart, but would stand him in good
stead in the case of some less than deadly assault.
   Simon found the weight of it reassuring, but Haestan warned him that at
the end of a long day’s journey he might not feel so cheerful about it.
   “Y’r soldier carries many burdens, boy,” the big man told him, “an’
sometimes keepin’ alive’s th’hardest one.”
   Haestan himself had been one of the three Erkynlanders to step forward
when the captains had called for men. Like his two companions,
Ethelbearn, a scarred, bushy-mustached veteran nearly as big as Haestan,
and Grimmric, a slender, hawkish man with bad teeth and watchful eyes, he
had spent so long preparing for siege that any sort of action was welcome,
even something as dangerous and mysterious as this quest looked to be.
When Haestan found out Simon was going too, he was even more adamant
in his desire to join them.
   “T’send such a boy’s madness,” he growled, “’special when he’s not
finished learning t’swing sword or shoot arrow. I’d best go an’ keep at
teachin’ ’im.”
   Duke Isgrimnur’s man Sludig was also there, a young Rimmersman
attired like the Erkynlanders in furs and conical helmet. In place of the
longsword the others carried, blond-bearded Sludig had two notch-bladed
hand axes thrust in his belt. He grinned cheerfully at Simon, anticipating his
question.
   “Sometimes one gets stuck in a skull or rib cage,” the Rimmersgarder
said. He spoke the Westerling tongue nimbly, with almost as little accent as
the duke. “It is nice to have another to use until you get the first one out.”
   Nodding, Simon tried to smile back.
   “Well met again, Simon.” Sludig extended a callused hand.
   “Again?”
   “We met once before, at Hoderund’s abbey,” Sludig laughed. “But you
spent the journey arse-end-up across Einskaldir’s saddle. I hope that is not
the only way you know how to ride.”
   Simon blushed, clasped the northerner’s hand, then turned away.
   “We have turned up little to help you on your way,” Jarnauga was
regretfully telling Binabik. “The Skendian monks left scant word about
Colmund’s expedition besides the transactions of its outfitting. They
probably thought him a madman.”
   “Most likely they had it correctly,” the troll observed. He was burnishing
the bone-handled knife he had carved to replace the missing piece of his
staff.
   “We did find one thing,” said Strangyeard. The priest’s hair stood up in
wild tufts, and his eye patch sat a little off-center, as though he had come
straight from spending an entire night poring over his books . . . which he
had. “The abbey’s book-keeper wrote: ‘the Baron does not know how long
his journeying to the Rhymer’s Tree shall last . . .’”
   “It is unfamiliar,” Jarnauga said, “in fact, it is probably something the
monk misheard, or got third hand . . . but it is a name. Perhaps it will make
more sense when you reach the mountain Urmsheim.”
   “Perhaps,” said Josua thoughtfully, “it is a town along the way, a village
at the mountain’s foot?”
   “Perhaps,” Binabik answered doubtfully, “but from what I am knowing
of those places, there is nothing lying between the ruins of the Skendi
monastery and the mountains—nothing there is but ice, trees, and rocks, of
course. Plenty of those things there are.”
   As final farewells were spoken, Simon heard Sangfugol’s voice drift out
from the room in back, where he was singing for the Lady Vorzheva.

               “. . . And shall I go a-wandering
               Out in the winter’s chill?
               Or shall I come now home again?
               Whate’er thou sayest, I will . . .”

   Simon picked up his quiver and looked for the third or fourth time to
make sure the White Arrow was still there. Bewildered, as though caught in
some slow and clinging dream, he realized that he was setting off on a
journey once more—and again he was not quite sure why. His time at
Naglimund had been so brief. Now it was over, at least for a long while. As
he touched the blue scarf tied loosely at his throat he realized he might not
see any of the others in this room again, anybody at Naglimund . . .
Sangfugol, old Towser, or Miriamele. He thought he felt his heart trip for a
moment, the beat stuttering like a drunkard, and was reaching for something
to lean on when he felt a strong hand clasp his elbow.
   “There you be, lad.” It was Haestan. “Bad enow that ye’ve no learnin’
with the sword an’ bow, now we’re goin’ t’put you t’horseback.”
   “Horseback?” Simon said. “I’ll like that.”
   “No y’won’t,” Haestan smirked. “Not for month or two.”
   Josua said a few words to each one of them, and then there were warm,
solemn handclasps all around. A short while later they were in the dark,
cold courtyard where Qantaqa and seven, stamping, steaming horses
awaited them, five for riding and a pair for carrying heavy gear. If there was
a moon, it was hidden like a sleeping cat in the blanket of clouds.
   “Good it is that we have this darkness,” Binabik said, swinging up into
the new saddle on Qantaqa’s gray back. The men, seeing the troll’s steed for
the first time, exchanged wondering looks as Binabik clicked his tongue
and the wolf sprang out before them. A group of soldiers quietly raised the
oiled portcullis, and they were out under the broad sky, the field of shadowy
nails spread around them as they made for the close-looming hills.
   “Good-bye, everyone,” Simon said quietly. They started up the sloping
path.

                                    •••

   High above on the Stile, at the crest of the hill overlooking Naglimund, a
black shape was watching.
   Even with his keen eyes, Ingen Jegger could make out little more in the
moonless murk than that someone had left the castle by the eastern gate.
That, however, was more than enough to raise his interest.
   He stood, rubbing his hands, and considered calling one of his men to go
down with him and get a better look. Instead he lifted his fist to his mouth
and hooted like a snow owl. Seconds later a huge shape appeared from the
scrub growth and leaped onto the Stile beside him. It was a hound, bigger
even than the one killed by the troll’s tame wolf, shining white in the
moonlight, its eyes twin pearl slots in a long, grinning face. It growled, a
deep, cavernous rumble, and swiveled its head from side to side, nostrils
wrinkling.
  “Yes, Niku’a, yes,” Ingen hissed quietly. “It is time to hunt once more.”
  A moment later the Stile was empty. The leaves rattled ever so gently
beside the ancient tiles, but no wind was blowing.