
                The Raven and the Cauldron




Maegwin winced as the clanging began again, the doleful clatter that
signified so much—and none of it good. One of the other girls, a small, fair-
skinned beauty that Maegwin had assessed at first glance as a quitter, let go
of the bar they were all pushing to cover her ears. The heavy piece of
fencing meant to hold the gate closed nearly tumbled free, but Maegwin and
the two other girls clung on grimly.
   “Bagba’s Herd, Cifgha,” she snarled at the one who had let loose, “are
you mad?! If this had fallen, someone might have been crushed, or at least
broken a foot!”
   “I’m sorry, I am, my lady,” the girl said, cheeks flushed, “it’s just that
loud noise . . . it frightens me!” She stepped back to take her place again,
and they all pushed, trying to get the massive oak bar over the top and into
the notch that would hold the paddock closed. Inside the restraining fence a
close-packed congregation of red cattle grunted, as unsettled as the young
women by the continual din.
   With a scrape and thump the log fell down into place, and they all turned,
panting, to slump with their backs against the gate.
   “Merciful are the gods,” Maegwin groaned, “my spine is breaking!”
   “It’s not right,” Cifgha opined, staring ruefully at the bleeding scratches
on her palms. “It’s men’s work!”
   The metallic clamor stopped, and for a moment the very silence seemed
to sing. Lluth’s daughter sighed and took in a deep breath of frosty air.
   “No, little Cifgha,” she said, “what the men are doing now is men’s
work, and whatever is left to do is women’s work—unless you want to
carry a sword and spear.”
   “Cifgha?” one of the other girls said, laughing. “She won’t even kill a
spider.”
   “I always call Tuilleth to do it,” Cifgha said, proud of her fastidiousness,
“and he always comes to me.”
   Maegwin made a sour face. “Well, we had better get used to dealing with
our own spiders. There will not be many menfolk around in the days to
come, and those who remain will have much else to do.”
   “It’s different for you, Princess,” Cifgha said. “You’re big and strong.”
   Maegwin stared hard at her but did not answer.
   “You don’t think the fighting will go on all summer, do you?” asked
another girl, as if speaking of a particularly dreary chore. Maegwin turned
to look at them all, at their sweat-dampened faces and their eyes already
roaming, looking for something more interesting to talk about. For a
moment she wanted to shout, to frighten them into realizing that this was
not a tournament, not a game of some sort, but deadly serious.
   But why rub their faces in the mud now? she thought, relenting. Soon
enough we will all of us get more than we need of it.
   “I don’t know if it will last that long, Gwelan,” she said, and shook her
head. “I hope not. I truly hope not.”

                                     •••

   As she made her way down from the paddocks toward the great hall, the
two men again started to beat the huge bronze cauldron that hung upside
down in its frame of oaken poles before the Taig’s front doors. As she
trotted past, the noise of the men furiously ringing the cauldron with iron-
tipped cudgels was so loud that she had to cover her ears with her hands.
She wondered again how her father and his advisors could think, let alone
plan life-and-death strategy with this awful ruckus just outside the hall.
Still, if Rhynn’s Cauldron was not rung, it would take days to warn each of
the outlying towns one by one, especially those that clung to the slopes of
the Grianspog. This way those villages and manor halls within earshot of
the cauldron would send riders to those beyond. The lord of the Taig had
rung the cauldron in times of danger since long before the days when Hern
the Hunter and Oinduth his mighty spear had made of their land a great
kingdom. Children who had never heard it sounded still recognized it
instantly, so many stories of Rhynn’s Cauldron were told.
   The Taig’s high windows today were shuttered against the chill wind and
mists. Maegwin found her father and his counselors in earnest discussion
before the fireplace.
   “My daughter,” Lluth said, standing. He expended visible effort to
produce a smile for her.
   “I took some women and got the last of the cattle into the big paddock,”
Maegwin reported. “I don’t think it’s right to squeeze them all so tightly.
The cows are miserable.”
   Lluth waved a dismissive hand. “Better we lose some few now than have
to try and round them up if we must fall back to the hills in a hurry.”
   At the far end of the hall the door opened, and the sentries banged their
swords against their shields once, as though to echo the piercing noise of
the Summons of the Cauldron. “I do thank you, Maegwin,” the king said,
turning from her to greet the new arrival.
   “Eolair!” he called out as the count strode forward, still dressed in travel-
stained clothes. “You are swift in returning from the healers. Good. How are
your men?”
   The Count of Nad Mullach approached, dropped briefly to one knee,
then stood again at Lluth’s impatient gesture. “Five are able-bodied; the two
wounded do not look well. The other four I shall call Skali to account for
personally.” He saw Lluth’s daughter at last and smiled his broad smile, but
his brow remained knitted in a weary, troubled study. “My Lady Maegwin,”
he said, and bowed again, kissing her long-fingered hand, which, she was
embarrassed to notice, was smudged with dirt from the paddock fence.
   “I heard you were back, Count,” she said. “I only wish it were in happier
circumstances.”
   “It’s a terrible shame about your brave Mullachi, Eolair,” the king said,
returning to sit with old Craobhan and his other trusted men. “But thanks be
to Brynioch and Murhagh One-arm that you stumbled on to that scout party.
If not, Skali and his bastard northerners would have been on us unawares.
After the skirmish with your men gets back to him, he’ll make a much more
cautious approach, I’m sure—he may even change his mind altogether.”
   “I wish that were true, my king,” Eolair said, shaking his head sadly.
Maegwin’s heart softened to see how bravely he bore his weariness; she
silently cursed her childish emotions. “But,” he continued, “I fear it is not.
For Skali to make such a treacherous attack so far from his home he must
feel sure the odds are leaning his way.”
   “Why, though, why?” Lluth protested. “We have been at peace with the
Rimmersmen for years!”
   “I think, sire, that has little to do with it.” Eolair was respectful but
unafraid to correct his king. “If old Isgrimnur still ruled in Elvritshalla, you
would be right to wonder, but Skali is Elias’ creature entirely, I think.
Rumor in Nabban said Elias will go into the field against Josua any day. He
knows we have refused Guthwulf’s ultimatum, and he fears to have the
Hernystiri unencumbered at his back when he moves against Naglimund.”
   “But Gwythinn is still there!” said Maegwin, frightened.
   “And with half a hundred of our best men, worse luck,” old Craobhan
growled from beside the fireplace.
   Eolair turned to give Maegwin a kind look, the condescending sort, she
felt sure. “Your brother is doubtless safer behind the thick stone walls of
Josua’s castle then he would be here in Hernysadharc. Also, if he hears of
our plight and can ride out, his fifty men will be at Skali’s back, to our
advantage.”
   King Lluth rubbed his eyes as though to wring out the dismay and worry
of the last day. “I do not know, Eolair, I do not know. I have a bad feeling
about this all. It takes no soothsayer to see an ill-omened year, which this
has been from its first instant.”
   “I’m still here, father,” Maegwin said, and went forward to kneel beside
him. “I will stay with you.” The king patted her hand.
   Eolair smiled and nodded at the girl’s words to her father, but his mind
was obviously on his two dying men, and on the vast force of Rimmersmen
moving down the Frostmarch into the Inniscrich, a great wave of sharp,
sentient iron.
   “Those who stay will perhaps not thank us,” he said beneath his breath.
   Outside the brazen voice of the cauldron sang out across Hernysadharc,
shouting ceaselessly to the hills beyond: Beware . . . Beware . . . Beware . . .
   Baron Devasalles and his small Nabbanai contingent had somehow
contrived to make their row of chambers in Naglimund’s drafty east wing
into a little bit of their southern home. Although the freakish weather was
too cold to allow the wide-open windows and doors so prevalent in balmy
Nabban, they had covered the stone walls with bright green and sky-blue
tapestries and filled every available surface with candles and guttering oil
lamps so that the shuttered rooms bloomed with light.
   It’s brighter in here at noon than it is outside, Isgrimnur decided. But it’s
like old Jarnauga said—they won’t be able to make everything else go away
so easy as they have the wintry dark, not by half.
   The duke’s nostrils twitched like those of a frightened horse. Devasalles
had set out pots of scented oils everywhere, some afloat with lighted wicks
like white worms, filling the chamber with the thick smells of island spices.
   I wonder if it’s the smell of everyone’s fear he doesn’t like, or that of good
honest iron? Isgrimnur grunted in distaste and slid his chair over by the
hallway door.
   Devasalles had been surprised to find the duke and Prince Josua at his
door, unannounced and unexpected, but had quickly invited them in,
throwing aside some of the multicolored robes that draped the hard chairs
so his guests could seat themselves.
   “I’m sorry to disturb you, Baron,” Josua said, leaning forward to rest his
elbows on his knees, “but I wished to speak to you alone before we
conclude the Raed tonight.”
   “Of course, my prince, of course,” Devasalles nodded encouragingly.
Isgrimnur, disdainfully observing the man’s shining hair and the glinting
baubles he wore at neck and wrist, wondered how he could be the deadly
swordsman his reputation declared him.
   Looks like he might catch a hilt on his own necklaces and hang himself.
   Josua hurriedly explained the events of the last two days, which were the
real reason the Raed had not continued. Devasalles, who, like the rest of the
assembled lords, had doubted but accepted the prince’s claim of illness,
raised his eyebrow but said nothing.
   “I could not talk openly; I still cannot,” Josua amplified. “In the mad
crush, the muster of local forces, the comings and goings, it would be only
too easy for someone of bad faith or one of Elias’ spies to take the news of
our fears and plans to the High King.”
   “But our fears are known to all,” Devasalles said, “and we have made no
plans—yet.”
   “By the time I am ready to speak of these things to all the lords, I will
have made the gates secure—but you see, Baron, you do not yet know all
the story.”
   With that the prince proceeded to tell Devasalles all the latest
discoveries, of the three swords and the prophetic poem in the mad priest’s
book, and how these things matched with the dreams of many.
   “But if you will tell all your liegemen this soon enough, why tell me
now?” Devasalles asked. By the doorway Isgrimnur snorted: he, too, had
wondered this same thing.
   “Because I need your lord Leobardis, and I need him now!” Josua said.
“I need Nabban!” He stood and began a circuit of the room, facing the walls
as though he studied their hangings, but his gaze was focused on a point
somewhere leagues beyond the stone and woven cloth.
   “I have needed your duke’s pledge from the beginning, but I need him
more now than ever I did. Elias has given Rimmersgard, for all practical
purposes, to Skali and his Kaldskryke Raven-clan. Thus he has put a knife
against King Lluth’s back; the Hernystiri will be able to send me many
fewer men, forced as they will be to keep a quantity back to defend their
lands. Already Gwythinn, who a week ago was chafing to be at Elias, is
anxious to return and help his father defend Hernysadharc and its outlands.”
   Josua whirled to stare Devasalles in the eyes. The prince’s face was a
mask of cold pride, but his hand twisted at his shirt-front, something neither
Isgrimnur or the baron failed to notice. “If Duke Leobardis ever hopes to be
more than a lackey to Elias, he must throw in his lot with me now.”
   “But why do you tell this to me?” Devasalles asked. He looked honestly
puzzled. “I know all of this last, and the other things—the swords and the
book and all—make no difference.”
   “Damn it, man, they do!” Josua snapped back, his voice rising almost to
a shout. “Without Leobardis, and with Hernystir under the northern threat,
my brother will have us as snug as if we were nailed in a barrel, and also he
is dealing with demons—and who can know what dread advantage that
means?! We have made some small, feeble attempt to counter those forces,
but what good will come of it—even if it succeeds, against all likelihood—
if all the freeholds have been already thrown down?! Neither your duke nor
anyone else will ever answer King Elias with anything but ‘yes, master,’
from now on!”
    The baron shook his head again, and his necklaces chinked gently. “I am
confused, my lord. Can it be that you do not know? I sent a message to the
Sancellan Mahistrevis in Nabban by my fastest rider the night before
yesterday, telling Leobardis I believed you would fight, and that he should
move to put his men into the field in your support.”
    “What?” Isgrimnur leaped up, his astonishment echoing the prince’s.
They both stood swaying over Devasalles, their expressions those of men
ambushed by night.
    “Why have you not told me?” Josua demanded.
    “But my prince, I did tell you,” Devasalles sputtered, “or at least, since I
was advised you might not be disturbed, I sent a message to your chambers
with my seal on it. Surely you read it?”
    “Blessed Usires and his Mother!” Josua smacked his open left hand
against his thigh. “I have only myself to blame, for it sits even now on my
bedside table. Deornoth brought it to me, but I was waiting for a quieter
moment. I suppose I forgot. Still it is no harm done, and your news is
excellent.”
    “You say Leobardis will ride?” Isgrimnur asked suspiciously. “How are
you so sure? You seemed to have more than a few doubts yourself.”
    “Duke Isgrimnur,” Devasalles’ tone was frosty, “surely you realize I was
only fulfilling my duty. In truth, Duke Leobardis has long been in sympathy
with Prince Josua. Likewise, he has feared Elias is becoming overbold. The
troops have been on alert for weeks.”
    “Then why send you?” Josua asked. “What did he think to discover that
he did not have already from me, through my messengers?”
    “He sought nothing new,” Devasalles said, “although there has been far
more learned here than I think any of us bargained for. No, he sent my
embassy more to make a show for certain others in Nabban.”
    “There is resistance among his liegemen?” Josua asked, eyes bright.
    “Of course, but that is not unusual . . . nor is it the source of my mission.
It was to undermine resistance from a closer source.” Here, although the
smallish chamber was obviously empty but for the three of them,
Devasalles darted a look on all sides.
    “It is his wife and son who resist most strongly his making common
cause with you,” Devasalles said at last.
    “You mean the eldest, Benigaris?”
    “Yes, else he or one of Leobardis’ younger sons should have been here in
my stead.” The baron shrugged. “Benigaris sees much he likes in Elias’
rule, and the Duchess Nessalanta . . .” The Nabbanai emissary shrugged
again.
    “She, too, favors the High King’s chances,” Josua smiled bitterly.
“Nessalanta is a clever woman. Too bad that now she will be forced, willy-
nilly, to support her husband’s choice of allies. She might well be correct in
her misgivings.”
    “Josua!” Isgrimnur was shocked.
    “I only jest, old friend,” the prince said, but his expression belied him.
“So the duke will go into the field then, good Devasalles?”
    “As soon as possible, Prince Josua. With the cream of Nabban’s knights
in his train.”
    “And a strong dollop of pikemen and archers as well, I hope. Well,
Aedon’s grace on us all, Baron.”
    He and Isgrimnur said their farewells and went out into the dark corridor,
the bright colors of the baron’s chamber left behind them like a dream
abandoned at the lip of awakening.
    “One person I know will be very glad of this news, Isgrimnur.”
    The duke raised a questioning eyebrow.
    “My niece. Miriamele was very upset when she thought Leobardis might
not come over. Nessalanta is her aunt, after all. She’ll be glad of this news,
indeed.”
    “Let us go tell her,” Isgrimnur proposed, taking Josua’s elbow and
guiding him out toward the courtyard. “She may be with the other court
ladies. I’m tired of looking at whiskery soldiers. I may be an old man, but I
still like to look on a lady or two from time to time.”
    “So be it.” Josua smiled, the first unforced example Isgrimnur had seen
in several days. “Then we’ll go by and visit your wife, and you may tell her
about your undiminished love of the ladies.”
   “Prince Josua,” the old duke said carefully, “you’ll never be too damn
old or exalted that I can’t knuckle your ears, just you see if I can’t.”
   “Not today, Uncle,” Josua smirked. “I’ll need ’em to appreciate just what
Gutrun has to say to you.”




   The wind soughing in off the water carried the smell of cypress. Tiamak,
wiping beads of sweat from his brow, gave silent thanks to He Who Always
Steps on Sand for the unexpected breeze. Coming back from checking his
trap line he had felt the storm-charged air descend on the Wran: hot, angry
air that came and would not go away, like a marsh crocodile circling a
leaking skiff.
   Again Tiamak wiped his forehead dry, and reached for the bowl of
yellowroot tea steeping on the firestone. As he sipped, not without some
pain to his cracked lips, he worried over what he should do.
   It was Morgenes’ strange message that disturbed him. For days its
ominous words had rattled in his head like pebbles in a dry gourd as he
poled his boat through the byways of the Wran, or made his way to market
in Kwanitupul, the trading village that crouched along the outlet stream
from lake Eadne. He made the three-day flatboat trip to Kwanitupul once
every new moon, putting his unusual schooling to good advantage at the
marketing stalls, helping the smaller Wrannamen merchants to bargain with
the Nabbanai and Perdruinese traders who worked the Wran’s coastal
villages. The taxing journey to Kwanitupul was a necessity, if only to earn a
few coins and perhaps a bag of rice. The rice he used to supplement that
occasional crab too stupid or too cocksure to avoid his traps. There were not
many crabs so obliging, however, which was the reason Tiamak’s usual
table fare was fish and roots.
   As he crouched in his tiny, banyan-perched cabin, anxiously turning over
Morgenes’ message for the hundredth time, he thought back to the bustling,
hilly streets of Ansis Pelippé, Perdruin’s capital, where he and the old
doctor had first met.
   As much as the clamor and spectacle of the vast trading port, a hundred,
no, many hundreds of times the size of Kwanitupul—a fact that his fellow
Wrannamen would never believe, provincial, sandscuffing louts that they
were—it was the smells Tiamak remembered most strongly, the million
shifting scents: the dank salt smell of the wharves, spiced with the tang of
the fishing boats; the cook fires in the street where bearded island men
offered skewers of bubbling, charred mutton; the musk of sweating,
champing horses whose proud riders, merchants and soldiers cantered
boldly down the middle of the cobbled streets, letting the pedestrians scatter
where they might; and of course, the swirling odors of saffron and
quickweed, of cinnamon and mantinges, that eddied through the Spice
District like fleeting, exotic solicitations.
   Just the memories made him so hungry he almost wanted to weep, but
Tiamak steeled himself. There was work to be done, and he could not be
distracted by such fleshly obsessions. Morgenes needed him, somehow, and
Tiamak had to be ready.
   In fact, it had been food that had brought him to Morgenes’ attention, all
those years ago in Perdruin. The doctor, on some kind of apothecarical
search through the trading districts of Ansis Pelippé, had bumped into and
almost knocked over the Wrannaman youth, so intently was young Tiamak
eyeing an array of marchpane on a baker’s table. The doctor was amused
and intrigued by the marsh lad so far from home, whose apologies to the
older man were so full of carefully-learned Nabbanai idiom. When
Morgenes learned that the boy was in Perdruin’s capitol to study with the
Usirean Brothers, and was the first of his village to leave the swampy Wran,
he bought him a large square of marchpane and a cup of milk. From that
moment on Morgenes was as a god to the astounded Tiamak.

                                    •••

   The smudged sheet of parchment before him, even though itself a copy
of the original message that had fallen to pieces from handling, was
nevertheless becoming hard to read. He had stared at it so many times,
however, that it no longer mattered. He had even placed it back into its
original ciphers and retranslated it, just to make sure he had not missed
some subtle but important detail.
    “The time of the Conqueror Star is surely upon us . . .” the doctor had
written, in the course of warning Tiamak this would likely be his last letter
for a long while. Tiamak’s help would be needed, Morgenes assured him,
“. . . if certain dreadful things which—it is said—are hinted at in the
infamous lost book of the priest Nisses . . .” were to be avoided.
    The first time he had gone to Kwanitupul after receiving Morgenes’
sparrow-borne message, Tiamak asked Middastri, a Perdruinese merchant
with whom he sometimes drank a bowl of beer, what dreadful things were
happening in Erchester, the city where Morgenes lived in Erkynland.
Middastri said he had heard of strife between the High King Elias and Lluth
of Hernystir, and of course everyone had been talking about the falling out
between Elias and his brother Prince Josua for months, but beyond that the
merchant could think of nothing special. Tiamak, who from Morgenes’
message had feared danger of a vaster and more immediate sort, had felt a
little better. Still, the import of the doctor’s message tugged at him.
    “The infamous lost book . . .” How had Morgenes known the secret?
Tiamak had not told anyone; he had wanted to surprise the doctor with it on
a visit he had planned to make next spring, his first time ever north of
Perdruin. Now it appeared Morgenes already knew something of his prize
—but why didn’t he say so? Why should he instead hint and riddle and
suggest, like a crab carefully poking the fish head out of one of Tiamak’s
traps?
    The Wrannaman set down his bowl of tea and moved across the low-
ceilinged room, hardly rising from his bent-kneed crouch. The hot, sour
wind began to blow a little more strongly, rocking the house on its tall stilts,
lifting the thatch with a serpentine hiss. He searched in his wooden chest for
the leaf-wrapped thing, carefully hidden below the stack of parchment that
was his own rewriting of Sovran Remedys of the Wranna Healers, what
Tiamak secretly liked to think of as his “great work.” Finding it at last he
brought it out and unwrapped it, not for the first time in the last fortnight.
    As it lay beside his transcription of Morgenes’ message, he was taken by
the contrast. Morgenes’ words were painstakingly copied in black root-ink
on cheap parchment, beaten so thin a candle flame held a handsbreadth
away might puff it into flame. The other, the prize, was scribed on a sheet
of tight-stretched skin or hide. The reddish brown words trailed crazily
across the page, as though the writer had been a-horseback, or sitting at
table during an earth tremor.
   This last was the jewel of Tiamak’s collection—indeed, if he was right
about what it was, would be the crowning gem of anyone’s collection. He
had found it in a great pile of other used parchments a trader in Kwanitupul
was selling for scribing practice. The trader had not known who the chest of
papers had belonged to, only that he had gotten it as part of a blind lot of
household goods in Nabban. Fearing that his good fortune might evaporate,
Tiamak had stifled the urge to question further and bought it on the spot—
along with a sheaf of other parchments—for one shiny Nabbanai quinis-
piece.
   He stared at it again—although he had read this more times even that
Morgenes’ message, if such was possible—and especially at the top of the
parchment, not so much torn as gnawed, whose disfigurement ended with
the letters “. . . ARDENVYRD.”
   Was not Nisses’ famous, vanished volume—some even called it
imaginary—named Du Svardenvyrd? How had Morgenes known? Tiamak
had not yet told anyone of his lucky find.
   Beneath the title the northern runes, smeared in some places, flaking
away into rust-colored powder in others, were nevertheless quite readable,
written in the archaic Nabbanai of five centuries gone.

              “. . . Bringe from Nuanni’s Rocke Garden
              The Man who tho’ Blinded canne See
              Discover the Blayde that delivers The Rose
              At the foote of the Rimmer’s greate Tree
              Find the Call whose lowde Claime
              Speakes the Call-bearer’s name
              In a Shippe on the Shallowest Sea–
              —When Blayde, Call, and Man
              Come to Prince’s right Hande
              Then the Prisoned shall once more go Free . . .”

   Below the strange poem a single name was printed in large, awkward
runes: “NISSES.”
   Although Tiamak stared and stared, inspiration still remained
anguishingly distant. At last, sighing, he rolled the ancient scroll back in its
jacket of preservative leaves and tucked it into his burrwood chest.
   What, then, did Morgenes want him to do? Bring this thing to the doctor
himself at the Hayholt? Or should he instead send it to another wise one,
like the witch woman Geloë, fat Ookequk up in Yiqanuc, or the fellow in
Nabban? Perhaps the wisest plan was merely to wait for Doctor Morgenes’
further word, instead of hurrying off foolishly without full understanding.
After all, from what Middastri had told him, whatever Morgenes feared
must still be a long way off; there was certainly time to wait until he knew
what it was that the doctor wanted.
   Time and patience, he counseled himself, time and patience . . .
   Outside his window the cypress branches groaned, suffering beneath the
wind’s rough handling.

                                      •••

   The chamber door flew open. Sangfugol and the lady Vorzheva leaped up
guiltily, as if they had been caught in some impropriety, although the length
of the chamber separated them. As they looked up, wide-eyed, the
minstrel’s lute, which had been propped against his chair, tilted and fell
over at his feet. He hurriedly caught it up and held it against his breast as
though it were an injured child.
   “Damn you, Vorzheva, what have you done!?” Josua demanded. Duke
Isgrimnur stood behind him in the doorway wearing a worried look.
   “Be calm, Josua,” he urged, tugging at the prince’s gray jerkin.
   “When I have the truth from this . . . this woman,” Josua spat. “Until
then, stay out of this, old friend.”
   Color was returning fast to Vorzheva’s cheeks.
   “What is your meaning?” she said. “You knock in doors like a bull, and
shout questions. What is your meaning?”
   “Do not seek to gull me. I have just come from speaking to the gate-
captain; I am sure he wishes I had never found him, so angry I was. He told
me that Miriamele went out yesterday forenoon with my permission—
which was no permission, but instead my seal attached to a false
document!”
   “And why do you shout at me?” the lady asked haughtily. Sangfugol
began to sidle toward the chamber door, still clutching his wounded
instrument.
   “That you know full well,” Josua growled, the flush finally beginning to
fade from his pale features, “and stay where you are, harper, for I am not
done with you. You have been much in my lady’s confidence of late.”
   “At your command, Prince Josua,” Sangfugol said haltingly, “to ease her
loneliness. But of the Princess Miriamele I swear I know nothing!”
   Josua moved forward into the chamber, swinging the heavy door shut
behind him without a look back. Isgrimnur, nimble despite his years and
girth, skipped out of its way.
   “Good Vorzheva, do not treat me as though I were one of the wagon boys
you grew up with. All I have heard from you is how the poor princess is
sad, the poor princess is missing her family. Now Miriamele is gone out the
gate with some villain, and some other confederate has used my seal ring to
give her safe passage! I am no fool!”
   The dark-haired woman returned his stare for a moment, then her lip
began to tremble. Angry tears started in her eyes as she sat back down, long
skirts rustling.
   “Very well, Prince Josua,” she said, “cut my head off if you like. I have
helped the poor girl to go away to her family in Nabban. If you were not so
heartless, you would have sent her yourself, with armed men to escort.
Instead, all she has for company is a kind monk.” She pulled a kerchief
from the bosom of her dress and dabbed her eyes. “Still, she is happier that
way, than to be cooped up here like a bird in a cage.”
   “Tears of Elysia!” Josua swore, throwing his hand in the air. “You foolish
woman! Miriamele wanted only to play at being an emissary—she thought
to find glory by bringing her Nabbanai relatives into this struggle on my
side.”
   “Perhaps it is not fair to say ‘glory,’ Josua,” Isgrimnur cautioned. “I think
the princess honestly means to help.”
   “And what is wrong with that?!” asked Vorzheva defiantly. “You need
the help of Nabban, do you not? Or are you too proud?”
   “God help me, the Nabbanai are with us already! Do you understand? I
have just seen Baron Devasalles an hour gone. But now the High King’s
daughter is out needlessly wandering the land somewhere, with all of her
father’s troops about to go into the field, and his spies swarming
everywhere like maggot-flies.”
   Josua waved his arms in frustration, then slumped into his chair, long
legs stretched before him.
   “It is too much for me, Isgrimnur,” he said wearily. “And you wonder
why I do not declare myself a rival for Elias’ throne? I cannot even keep a
young girl safely under my roof.”
   Isgrimnur smiled dolefully. “Her father didn’t have much luck in keeping
her either, as I recall.”
   “Still.” The prince brought his hand up to knead his brow. “Usires, my
very head throbs with it all.”
   “Now, Josua,” the duke said, casting a look at the others to warn them to
keep silence, “all is not lost. We must simply put a troop of good men out to
beat the bushes for Miriamele and this monk, this . . . Cedric or
whatever . . .”
   “Cadrach,” said Josua tonelessly.
   “Yes, then, Cadrach. Well, a young girl and a holy friar cannot move that
quickly afoot. We shall simply put some men to horse and get after them.”
   “Unless the Lady Vorzheva here has hidden horses for them as well,”
Josua said sourly. He sat up. “You haven’t, have you?!”
   Vorzheva could not meet his gaze.
   “Merciful Aedon!” Josua swore. “That is the final trick! I shall send you
back to your barbarian father in a sack, you wildcat!”
   “Prince Josua?” It was the harper. When he got no response he cleared
his throat and tried again. “My prince?”
   “What?” Josua said irritably. “Yes, you may go. I will have words with
you later. Go.”
   “No sir . . . that is, did you say the monk’s name was . . . Cadrach?”
   “Yes, so the gate-captain said. He spoke with the man a bit. Why, do you
know him, or know his haunts?”
   “Well, no, Prince Josua, but I think the boy Simon met him. He told me
much of his adventures, and the name sounds quite familiar. Oh, sir, if it is
him, the princess may be in some danger.”
   “What do you mean?” Josua leaned forward.
   “The Cadrach Simon told me of was a rogue and a cutpurse, sir. That one
also went in the guise of a monk, but he was no Aedonite man, that’s sure.”
   “It cannot be!” Vorzheva said. The kohl around her eyes had run onto her
cheeks. “I have met this man, and he quoted me from the Book of Aedon.
He is a good, kind man, Brother Cadrach.”
   “Even a demon can quote the Book,” Isgrimnur said, shaking his head
sorrowfully.
   The prince had sprung to his feet, and was moving to the door.
   “We must put men out at once, Isgrimnur,” he said, then stopped and
turned back, taking Vorzheva by the arm. “Come, lady,” he said brusquely.
“You will not undo your damage, but you may at least come along and tell
us all you know, where you have hid the horses and all such.” He pulled her
to her feet.
   “But I cannot go out!” she said, shocked. “Look, I have been weeping!
My face, it is terrible.”
   “For the hurt you have done to me, and maybe to my foolish niece as
well, it is a small enough penalty. Come!”
   He hurried her before him out of the chamber, Isgrimnur following. Their
arguing voices echoed down the stone corridor.
   Sangfugol, left behind, looked sorrowfully down at his lute. There was a
long crack twisting the length of its curved, ashwood back, and one of the
strings hung loose in a useless curl.
   “Scant music but sour will be made tonight,” he said.




   It was still an hour before dawn when Lluth came to her bedside. She had
not been able to sleep all night, stretched tight inside with worry for him,
but as he bent over to touch her arm she pretended sleep, wanting to spare
him the only thing left from which she could spare him: the knowledge of
her own great fear.
   “Maegwin,” he said softly. Her eyes shut fast, she fought the urge to
reach up and hug him tight. Full-armored but for his helmet, as she knew
from the sound of his walk and the scent of polishing oil, he might have
trouble straightening up again if she pulled him down so close. Even the
parting she could stand, bitter though it was. The thought of him showing
his weariness and his age this night of all nights, she could not.
   “Is that you, Father?” she said at last.
   “It is.”
   “And are you going now?”
   “I must. The sun will be up soon, and we hope to reach the edge of the
Combwood by midmorning.”
   She sat up. The fire had burned out, and even with her eyes open she
could not see much. Faintly, through the walls, she could hear the sound of
her stepmother Inahwen sobbing. Maegwin felt a twinge of anger at such a
display made of grief.
   “Brynioch’s Shield over you, father,” she said, reaching out a blind hand
to find his battered face. “I wish I was a son, to fight at your side.”
   She felt his lips curl beneath her fingers. “Ah, Maegwin, you were ever a
fierce one. Have you not duty enough here? It will not be easy being
mistress of the Taig while I am gone.”
   “You forget your wife.”
   Lluth smiled again in the dark. “I do not. You are strong, Maegwin,
stronger than she. You must lend her some of your strength.”
   “She usually gets what she wants.”
   The king’s voice was gentle, but he caught her wrist in a firm hand.
“Don’t, daughter. Along with Gwythinn, you are the three I love most in all
the world. Help her.”
   Maegwin hated to cry. She pulled her hand from her father’s grasp and
rubbed her eyes fiercely. “I will,” she said. “Forgive me.”
   “No forgiveness necessary,” he answered, then took her hand once more
and squeezed. “Farewell, daughter, until I come back again. There are cruel
ravens in our fields, and we have work to do chasing them out again.”
   She was up and out of bed then, and threw her arms around him. A
moment later the door opened and closed, and she heard his steps going
slowly up the hall, the clink of spurs like sad music.
   Later, when she cried, it was with the blankets over her head so that no
one would hear.