
                Fresh Wounds and Old Scars




The horses were more than a little afraid of Qantaqa, so Binabik rode
the great gray wolf well ahead of Simon and the others, carrying a hooded
lamp to show the way in the blanketing darkness. As the tiny caravan made
its way along the skirt of the hills, the shuddering light bobbed before them
like a corpse-candle.
    The moon cowered within its nest of clouds, and their progress was slow
and cautious. Between the gentle, jogging rhythm of the horse beneath him,
and the feel of its warm, broad back, Simon nearly fell asleep several times,
only to be startled awake by thin, scrabbling fingers at his face: the
branches of close-hovering trees. There was little talk. From time to time
one of the men whispered a word of encouragement to his mount, or
Binabik called back softly to warn of some upcoming obstacle; but for
those sounds, and the muffled percussion of hoofbeats, they might have
been a gray pilgrimage of lost souls.
    When the moonlight finally began to seep through a rent in the cloud
ceiling, not long before dawn, they stopped to make camp. Vaporous breath
caught the moon’s glow, making it seem they exhaled silver-blue clouds as
they tied up their mounts and the two packhorses. They lit no fire.
Ethelbearn took first watch; the others, wrapped in their heavy cloaks,
curled up on the damp ground to snatch what sleep they could.
    Simon awoke to a morning sky like thin gruel, and nose and ears that
seemed to have magically turned to ice in the night. As he crouched by the
small morning campfire chewing the bread and hard cheese Binabik had
doled out, Sludig sat down beside him. The young Rimmersman’s cheeks
were polished red by the brisk wind.
   “This is like our early spring weather, back in my home,” he grinned,
skewering a heel of bread on the long blade of his knife and holding it over
the flame. “It makes a man of you quick, you will see.”
   “I hope there are other ways of becoming a man besides freezing to
death,” Simon grunted, rubbing his hands together.
   “You can kill a bear with a spear,” Sludig said. “We do that, also.”
   Simon could not tell whether he was joking.
   Binabik, who had just sent Qantaqa off to hunt, came over and sat down
cross-legged. “Well, the two of you, are you ready to be at hard riding
today?” he said. Simon did not respond, since his mouth was full of bread;
when a moment later Sludig had not answered either, Simon looked up. The
Rimmersman was staring straight into the fire, his mouth in a set, straight
line. The silence was uncomfortable.
   Simon swallowed. “I suppose so, Binabik,” he said quickly. “Do we have
far to go?”
   Binabik smiled blithely, as though the Rimmersman’s silence were
perfectly natural. “We will be going as far as we shall wish. Today it seems
good to ride long, since the skies are clear. Sooner than we are wishing we
may be found by rain and snow.”
   “Do we know where we’re headed?”
   “In part, friend Simon.” Binabik took a length of twig from the outskirts
of the firepit and began to scratch lines in the moist earth. “Here is standing
Naglimund,” he said, drawing a rough circle. He then made a line of scallop
shapes starting at the circle’s right flank and extending up for some
distance. “That, the Wealdhelm. This cross is being us here.” He made a
mark not far past the circle. Then in quick succession he drew a large oval
near the far end of the mountains, a few smaller circles scattered around its
rim, and what seemed to be another line of hills out beyond.
   “So, then,” he said, hunkering down close over his furrowed patch of
ground. “Soon it is we shall be approaching this lake,” he indicated the
large elliptical shape, “which is called Drorshull.”
   Sludig, who seemingly against his will had leaned over to look,
straightened up. “Drorshullvenn—the Lake of Dror’s Hammer.” He
frowned and tilted forward once more, making a dot with his finger along
the lake’s western rim. “There is Vestvennby—the thaneland of that traitor,
Storfot. I would like very much to pass through there by night.” He wiped
the breadcrumbs from the blade of his dagger and held it up to catch the
weak firelight.
   “We will not, however, be going to there,” Binabik said sternly, “and for
you revenge must wait. We are passing to the other side, past Hullnir to
Haethstad, nearby where is the Abbey of Saint Skendi, then most likely up
across the plain of the north, toward the mountains. No stopping before for
cutting of throats.” He pushed his stick up beyond the lake toward the row
of rounded shapes.
   “That is because you trolls do not understand honor,” Sludig said bitterly,
staring at Binabik from beneath his thick blond eyebrows.
   “Sludig,” Simon said pleadingly, but Binabik did not respond to the
man’s baiting.
   “We are having a task to perform,” the troll responded calmly.
“Isgrimnur, your duke, wishes it, and his will is not served with faithfulness
by creeping off at nighttimes to slit the throat of Storfot. That is not a troll’s
lack of honor, Sludig.”
   The Rimmersman looked hard at him for a moment, then shook his head.
“You are right.” There was, to Simon’s surprise, no sullenness remaining in
his voice. “I am angry, and my words were poorly chosen.” He got up and
walked away toward where Grimmric and Haestan stood reburdening the
horses; as he went he flexed his supple, muscular shoulders as though to
loosen knots. Simon and the troll stared after him for a moment.
   “He apologized,” Simon said.
   “All Rimmersmen are not being that cold one Einskaldir,” his friend
replied. “But, also, all trolls are not either being Binabik.”

                                      •••

   It was a very long day’s ride, up along the flank of the hills under the
cover of the trees. When they finally stopped for their evening meal, Simon
knew for certain the truth of Haestan’s earlier warnings: although his horse
walked slowly, and their march had been over mild terrain, his legs and
crotch felt as though he had spent the day attached to some dreadful torture
device. Haestan, not without a grin, kindly explained to him that after a
night’s stiffening the worst would be yet to come; he then offered him as
much of the wineskin as he cared to drink. When Simon eventually curled
up that evening between the humped and mossy roots of a nearly leafless
oak tree he was feeling a little better, although the wine made him think he
heard voices singing strange songs on the wind.

                                    •••

   When he woke up in the morning it was to discover that not only was
everything Haestan had claimed true tenfold, but snow was swirling down
as well, covering Wealdhelm Hills and travelers alike in a cold, clinging
white coverlet. Even shivering in the weak Yuven daylight he could still
hear the wind-voices. What they were saying was clear: they mocked
calendars, and fleered at travelers who thought they could walk with
impunity into winter’s new kingdom.




   The Princess Miriamele stared with horror at the scene spread before her.
What had been since the beginning of the morning’s ride a riot of colors and
black smoke on the horizon now lay clear as she and Cadrach stood on the
hillside overlooking the Inniscrich. It was a tapestry of death, woven in
flesh and metal and shredded earth.
   “Merciful Elysia,” she gasped, reining in her shying horse, “what has
happened here!? Is this my father’s work?”
   The small round man squinted, mouth working for a moment in what the
princess took for silent prayer. “Most of the dead are Hernystiri, my lady,”
he said at last, “and I’m guessing the others are Rimmersmen, from the look
of them.” He frowned on the scene below as a group of startled ravens all
leaped up at once like a clutch of flies, circled, then settled again. “It
appears the battle, or the retreating part of it, has moved away west.”
   Miriamele found her eyes filling with frightened tears, and reached up a
fist to scour them away. “The survivors must be falling back to
Hernysadharc, to the Taig. Why has this happened? Has everyone gone
mad?”
   “Everyone was mad already, my lady,” Cadrach said with a strange,
sorrowful smile. “It is merely that the times have brought it out in them.”

                                     •••

   They had ridden swiftly for the first day and a half, pushing the Lady
Vorzheva’s horses to their gasping limit until they reached and crossed the
Greenwade River at its upper fork, some twenty-five leagues southwest of
Naglimund. They then slowed their pace, giving the horses a chance to rest
in case they should again need to ride in haste.
   Miriamele rode well in the manly style, which was appropriate to the
garments she wore, the breeches and jerkin in which she had disguised
herself in her escape from the Hayholt. Her shorn hair was again black-
dyed, although little of it showed beneath the traveling hood worn as much
against the cold as against discovery; Brother Cadrach riding beside her in
his travel-stained gray habit was no more likely than she to attract notice. In
any case, there were few other travelers on the river road in such
discouraging weather, and in the midst of such perilous times. The princess
had begun to feel quite confident that their escape was safely effected.
   Since the middle of the day before they had ridden along the dike road
above the wide, swollen river with the braying of distant trumpets in their
ears, shrill brazen voices that outstripped even the moan of the rain-laden
wind. At first it was frightening, raising the specter of some vengeful troop
of her uncle’s or her father’s at their heels, but soon it became apparent that
she and Cadrach were approaching the source of the clamor, rather than the
reverse. Then, this morning, they had seen the first signature of battle:
lonely trails of black smoke inking the now-calm sky.

                                     •••

   “Isn’t there anything we can do?” Miriamele asked, dismounted and
standing beside her gently blowing horse. But for the birds the scene below
them was as motionless as if carved in gray and red stone.
   “And what might we do, my lady?” Cadrach asked, still a-saddle. He
took a swig from his wineskin.
   “I don’t know. You’re a priest! Mustn’t you say a mansa for their souls?”
   “For whose souls, princess? Those of my pagan countrymen, or those of
the good Aedonites from Rimmersgard who have come down to pay this
call on them?” His bitter words seemed to hang like smoke.
   Miriamele turned to stare at the little man, whose eyes now seemed quite
unlike those of the jocular companion of the last few days. When he told
stories or sang his Hernystiri riding and drinking songs, he fairly glittered
with cheer. Now he looked like a man savoring the doubtful victory of a
dire prophecy fulfilled.
   “All Hernystiri are not pagans!” she said, angry with his strange mood.
“You yourself are an Aedonite monk!”
   “Should I go down, then, and ask who is pagan and who is not?” He
waved a plump hand at the unmoving spectacle of carnage. “No, my lady,
the only work still to be done here will be done by scavengers.” He prodded
his horse with his heels and rode ahead a short distance.
   Miriamele stood and stared, pressing her cheek against the horse’s neck.
“Surely no religious man could stand by and see such a scene unmoved,”
she called after him, “even that red monster Pryrates!” Cadrach hunched at
the mention of the king’s counselor as if struck in the back, then rode a few
more paces before stopping to sit for a while in silence.
   “Come, lady,” he said at last over his shoulder. “We must get down from
this hillside, where we are in such plain view. Not all scavengers are
feathered, and some go on two legs.”
   Dry-eyed now, the princess shrugged wordlessly and clambered back
into the saddle, following the monk down the forested slope that ran beside
the bloodied Inniscrich.




   As he slept that night in their camp on the hillside above the flat, white,
treeless expanse of Drorshull lake, Simon dreamed again of the wheel.
   Once more he found himself snagged helplessly, tossed about like a
child’s doll of rags, lifted aloft on the wheel’s vast rim. Cold winds buffeted
him, and shards of ice scored his face as he was drawn up into freezing
blackness.
   At the summit of the ponderous revolution, wind-ripped and bleeding, he
saw a gleam in the darkness, a luminous vertical stripe that reached from
the impenetrable blackness above to the equally murky depths below. It was
a white tree, whose broad trunk and thin branches glowed as though stuffed
with stars. He tried to pull himself free from the wheel’s grip, to leap out
toward the beckoning whiteness, but it seemed he was held fast. With one
great, final effort he tore loose and jumped.
   He plunged downward through a universe of glowing leaves, as though
he flew among the lamps of the stars; he cried out for blessed Usires to save
him, for God’s help, but no hands caught at him as he plummeted through
the cold firmament. . . .

                                     •••

   Hullnir, at the slowly-freezing lake’s eastern rim, was a town empty of
even ghosts. Half-buried beneath the drifting snows, its houses unroofed by
wind and hail, it lay like the carcass of a starved elk beneath dark,
indifferent skies.
   “Have Skali and his ravens so soon wrung the life from all the north-
land?” Sludig asked, his eyes wide.
   “As like they all fled th’late frost,” Grimmric said, pulling his cloak tight
beneath his narrow chin. “Too cold here, too far away from th’few roads
open.”
   “It is probable Haethstad will be the same,” Binabik said, urging Qantaqa
back up the slope. “Good it is that we had no plan to find supplies on our
way.”
   Here at the lake’s far end the hills began to fade, and a great arm of the
northern Aldheorte reached out to cloak their last, low slopes. It was
different than the southern part of the forest Simon had seen, and not only
because of the snow that now carpeted the forest floor, stealing away the
very sound of their passage. Here the trees were straight and tall, dark green
pines and spruce that stood like pillars beneath their white mantles,
separating wide, shadowy corridors. The riders moved as through pale
catacombs, snow sifting down from above like the ash of ages.
    “There is someone there, Brother Cadrach!” Miriamele hissed. She
pointed. “There! Can’t you see the gleam—it’s metal!”
    Cadrach lowered the wineskin and stared. His mouth was stained
purplish red at the corners. He scowled and squinted, as if to satisfy a whim
of hers. A moment later the frown deepened.
    “By the Good God, you are right, Princess,” he whispered, drawing back
on his reins. “There is something there, sure enough.” He handed the traces
to her and slipped down onto the thick green grass, then, with a gestured
admonition to silence, he crept forward; using a broad tree trunk to shield
his almost equally stout form, he moved to within a hundred paces of the
glimmering object, craning his neck around to peer at it like a child playing
hide-and-seek. After a moment he turned back and beckoned. Miriamele
rode forward, bringing Cadrach’s horse beside her own.
    It was a man who lay half-propped against the sprawling base of an oak
tree, clad in armor that still shone in a few spots, despite the fearful
battering it had taken. Lying in the grass at his side was the hilt of a
shattered sword, and a broken pole and green pennant which bore the
blazoned White Stag of Hernystir.
    “Elysia Mother of God!” Miriamele said as she hurried forward. “Is he
still alive?”
    Cadrach quickly tied the horses up to one of the oak’s arching roots and
then moved to her side. “It doesn’t look likely.”
    “But he is!” the princess said, “Listen . . . he is breathing!”
    The monk kneeled down to look at the man whose breath indeed sounded
haltingly within the chamber of his half-open helmet. Cadrach tilted up the
mask beneath the winged crest to expose a mustached face almost hidden
by runnels of dried blood.
    “Hounds of Heaven,” Cadrach sighed, “it is Arthpreas—the Count of
Cuihmne.”
    “You know him?” Miriamele said, searching in her saddlebag for the
waterskin. She found it, and moistened a piece of cloth.
    “Know of him, really,” Cadrach said, and gestured at the two birds
stitched on the knight’s tattered surcoat. “He’s the liege-lord of Cuihmne,
near Nad Mullach, he is. His sign is the twin meadowlarks.”
   Miriamele dabbed at Arthpreas’ face while the monk gingerly explored
the bloodied rents in his armor. The knight’s eyes fluttered.
   “He’s awakening!” the princess said, breathing in sharply. “Cadrach, I
think he will live!”
   “Not long, Lady,” the small man said quietly. “There is a wound here in
his belly as wide as my hand. Let me give him the last words, and he can
die in peace.”
   The count groaned and a little blood ran over the rim of his lip.
Miriamele tenderly wiped it from his chin. His eyes trembled open.
   “E gundhain sluith, ma connalbehn . . .” the knight muttered in
Hernystiri. He coughed weakly, and more blood bubbled onto his lips.
“There’s a good . . . lad. Did they . . . take the Stag?”
   “What does he mean?” Miriamele whispered. Cadrach pointed to the torn
banner on the grass beneath the count’s arm.
   “You rescued it, Count Arthpreas,” she said, holding her face close to
his. “It’s safe. What happened?”
   “Skali’s Raven-warriors . . . they were everywhere.” A long cough, and
the knight’s eyes opened wider. “Ah, my brave boys . . . dead, all dead . . .
hacked up like, like . . .” Arthpreas gave a painful, dry sob. His eyes stared
up at the sky, moving slowly as if tracing the movements of clouds.
   “And where is the king?” he said at last. “Where is our brave old king?
The goirach northerners were all around him, Brynioch rot them, Brynioch
na ferth ub . . . ub strocinh . . .”
   “The king?” Miriamele whispered. “He must mean Lluth.”
   The count’s eyes suddenly lit on Cadrach, and for a moment were
kindled as though by an inner spark. “Padreic?” he said, and lifted a
shaking, bloodied hand to lay it on the monk’s wrist. Cadrach flinched and
made as though to draw away, but his eyes seemed caught, lit by a strange
gleam. “Is it you, Padreic feir? Have you . . . come back . . . ?”
   The knight stiffened then, and gave vent to a long, racking cough which
brought the red flow up like an underground spring. A moment later his
eyes rolled up beneath his dark lashes.
   “Dead,” Cadrach said after a moment, a harsh note in his voice. “Usires
save him, and God comfort his soul.” He made the sign of the tree over
Arthpreas’ unmoving breast and stood up.
   “He called you Padreic,” Miriamele said, staring abstractedly at the cloth
she held, now entirely crimson.
   “He mistook me,” the monk said. “A dying man looking for an old
friend. Come. We have no shovels for digging a grave. Let us at least find
stones to cover him. He was . . . I am told he was a good man.”
   As Cadrach walked away across the clearing, Miriamele carefully pulled
the armored gauntlet from Arthpreas’ hand, then wrapped it in the torn
green banner.
   “Please come and help me, my lady,” Cadrach called. “We cannot afford
to be spending much time here.”
   “I will come,” she said, slipping the bundle into her saddlebag. “This
much time we can afford.”




   Simon and his companions made their way slowly around the long
circumference of the lake, along a peninsula of tall trees and drifting snow.
On their left lay the frozen mirror of Drorshull; the white shoulders of the
upper Wealdhelm loomed on the right. The song of the wind was loud
enough to drown all conversation softer than a full shout. As Simon rode,
watching Haestan’s wide, dark back jounce along before him, it seemed
they were all solitary islands in a cold sea: in constant sight of each other,
but separated by untrafficked expanses. He found his thoughts turning
inward, lulled by the monotonous pacing of his horse.
   Strangely, in his mind’s inlooking eye, the Naglimund they had just left
seemed as insubstantial as a distant memory of childhood. Even the faces of
Miriamele and Josua were hard to recapture, as though he tried to summon
the features of strangers whose importance had not been discovered until
long after they were gone. Instead, he found vivid memories of the
Hayholt . . . of long summer evenings in the commons yard, itchy with
mown grass and insects, or of breezy spring afternoons climbing on the
walls, when the heady scent of the rose hedges in the courtyard pulled at
him like warm hands. Remembering the slightly damp odor of the walls
around his tiny cot, pushed into a corner in the servant’s quarters, he felt
himself a king in exile, as though he had lost a palace to some foreign
usurper—as, in a way, he had.
    The others seemed just as enfolded in their own thoughts; but for
Grimmric’s whistling—a thin trill of music that only occasionally rose
above the wind, but seemed nevertheless constant—the trip around
Drorshull Lake was made in silence.
    Several times, when he could make her out through the fluttering
snowflakes, he thought he saw Qantaqa stop and tilt her head as though to
listen. When they finally made camp that night, with the main body of the
lake now lying behind them to the southwest, he asked Binabik about it.
    “Does she hear something, Binabik? Is there something ahead of us?”
    The troll shook his head, extending his now unmittened hands closer to
the small fire. “Perhaps, but things that are before us, even in such weather,
Qantaqa smells them—it is into the wind that we are walking. More likely it
is she hears a sound from behind or to either side.”
    Simon thought about that for a moment. Certainly nothing had followed
them from barren Hullnir, devoid even of birds.
    “Someone is behind us?” he said.
    “I am doubting. Who? And for what reason?”
    Nevertheless, Sludig, bringing up the rear of the column, had also
noticed the wolf’s seeming uneasiness. Although he still was not entirely
comfortable with Binabik, and certainly was not ready to trust Qantaqa—he
rolled his sleeping cloak at the far side of camp when he slept—he did not
doubt the gray wolf’s keen senses. As the others sat eating hard bread and
dried venison, he had taken out his whetstone to sharpen his hand axes.
    “Here between the Dimmerskog—the forest north of us—and
Drorshullven,” Sludig said frowning, “it has always been wild country, even
when Isgrimnur or his father ruled in Elvritshalla and winter knew its place.
These days, who knows what walks the white waste, or the Trollfells
beyond?” He scraped rhythmically.
    “Trolls, for one thing,” said Binabik sardonically, “but I can be assuring
you there is scant fear of troll-folk descending upon us in the night for
killing and plunder.”
    Sludig grinned sourly and continued sharpening his axe.
    “Th’Rimmersman speaks sense,” Haestan said, giving Binabik a
displeased look. “An’ tis not trolls I’m fearin’ myself.”
   “Are we near to your country, Binabik?” Simon asked. “To Yiqanuc?”
   “We will be approaching with more closeness when we reach the
mountains, but the place of my birth is in actuality, I think, east of where it
is we are heading.”
   “You think?”
   “Do not be forgetting, we are still not sure with exactness where we go.
‘The Rhymer’s Tree’—a tree of rhymes? I know the mountain called
Urmsheim, where it is supposed this Colmund went, is standing somewhere
to the north, between Rimmersgard and Yiqanuc, but a big mountain it is.”
The troll shrugged. “Is the tree on it? Before it? Or somewhere else all
together? I cannot know at this time.”
   Simon and the others stared glumly into the fire. It was one thing to
undertake a perilous mission for your sovereign, it was another thing to
search blindly in the white wilderness.
   The flames hissed as they bit at the damp wood. Qantaqa rose from
where she stretched on the naked snow and cocked her head. She walked
purposefully to the edge of the clearing they had chosen, in a grove of pines
on the low hillside. After a suspenseful interval, she walked back and lay
down again. No one said a word, but a moment of tension had passed,
leaving their hearts a little lighter once more.
   When they had all finished eating, more logs were fed onto the blaze,
which popped and steamed in cheerful spite of the flurrying snow. As
Binabik and Haestan talked quietly, and Simon used Sludig’s whetstone on
his own sword, a thin melody rose up. Simon turned to see Grimmric
whistling, lips pursed, eyes fixed on the wavering flames. When he looked
up and saw Simon staring at him, the wiry Erkynlander gave him a snaggle-
toothed smile.
   “Put me t’mind of somethin’,” he said. “N’old winter song, it was.”
   “What then?” Ethelbearn asked. “Sing it, man. No harm in quiet song.”
   “Yes, go ahead,” Simon seconded.
   Grimmric looked over to Haestan and the troll, as if fearing an objection
from that quarter, but they were still enmeshed in their discussion. “Well,
then,” he said. “Suppose there’s no harm in’t.” He cleared his throat and
looked down, as if embarrassed by the sudden attention. “S’just a song my
old father’d sing when we’d go out of a Decander afternoon t’cut wood.”
He cleared his throat. “A winter song,” he added, then cleared his throat
again and sang, in a scratchy but not untuneful voice.

              “Ice is a-growin’ in th’ thatch
              And snow is upon th’ sill.
              Someone’s a-knockin’ at th’ door
              Out in th’ winter’s chill.

              Sing you hey-a-ho, an’ who can it be?

              Fire is a-burnin’ in th’ grate
              Shadows is on th’ wall.
              Pretty Arda, she answers up
              Inside her latchlocked hall.

              Sing you hey-a-ho, an’ who can it be?

              Comes then a voice from winter-dark,
              ‘Open up your door.
              Let me in for to share your fire
              An’ to warm my hands before.’

              Sing you hey-a-ho, an’ who can it be?

              Arda, chaste an’ chary maid
              She answers. ‘Tell me, sir-o,
              Who can you be, who walks abroad
              When nought outside should stir-o?’

              Sing you hey-a-ho, an’ who can it be?

              ‘A holy man,’ th’ voice replies,
              ‘Who has not food nor shelter.’
              Th’ words all spoke so piteous
              If she were ice, ’twould melt her.
              Sing you hey-a-ho, an’ who can it be?

              ‘Then I will let you in, good Father,
              Old bones will soon be warmer.
              A maid can trust a man o’ God
              That he will never harm her.’

              Sing you hey-a-ho, an’ who can it be?

              Open th’ door an’ who stands there?
              A man who’s nothin’ holy.
              Old One-Eye with his cloak an’ staff.
              An’ his wide-brim hat pulled lowly.

              ‘I lied, I lied, t’get inside,’
              Old One-Eye grins and dances,
              ‘Th’frost’s my home, but I love t’roam
              An’ a maid is worth th’ chances’ . . .”

   “Holy Usires, are you mad?!” Sludig leaped up, startling everybody. His
eyes wide with horror, he made the sign of the Tree broadly before him, as
though to fend off a charging beast. “Are you mad?” he asked again, staring
at the dumbfounded Grimmric.
   The Erkynlander looked around at his other companions, shrugging
helplessly. “What’s wrong with this Rimmersman, troll?” he asked.
   Binabik squinted up at Sludig, who was still standing. “What is the
wrongness, Sludig? We are none of us understanding.”
   The northerner looked around at the uncomprehending faces. “Are you
all without your senses?” he asked. “Do you not know of who you are
singing?”
   “Old One-Eye?” Grimmric said, eyebrow cocked in puzzlement. “S’just
a song, northman. Learned it from m’father.”
   “That is Udun One-Eye you sing of—Udun Rimmer, the black old god of
my people. We worshiped him in Rimmersgard when we were sunk in our
heathen ignorance. Do not call up Udun Skyfather when you walk in his
country, or he will come—to your grief.”
   “Udun the Rimer . . .” Binabik said wonderingly.
   “If you don’t believe in him any more,” Simon asked, “why are you
afraid to speak of him?”
   Sludig stared, his mouth still taut with worry. “I did not say I did not
believe in him . . . Aedon forgive me . . . I said we Rimmersmen no longer
worship him.” After a moment he lowered himself back to the ground. “I
am sure you think me foolish. Better that than we call down jealous old
gods on ourselves. We are in his country now.”
   “S’just a song,” Grimmric said defensively. “I wasna callin’ down
anythin’. S’just a bloody song.”
   “Binabik, is that why we call it ‘Udensday’?” Simon began, then broke
off when he saw the troll was not listening. Instead, the little man wore a
broad, cheerful grin, as though he had just swallowed a draught of some
pleasing liquor.
   “That is it, certainly!” the little man said, and turned to pale, stern-faced
Sludig. “You have thought of it, my friend.”
   “What are you talking about?” the blond-bearded northman asked with
some irritation. “I do not understand you.”
   “What we are looking for. The place where Colmund was going: The
Rhymer’s Tree. Except we were at thinking ‘rhyme’ like poetry, but you
have now said it. ‘Udun Rimmer’—Udun the Rimer. ‘Rime’ meaning
‘frost.’ It is a Rimer’s Tree we are searching for.”
   Sludig retained his blank look for a moment, then slowly nodded his
head. “Blessed Elysia, troll—the Uduntree. Why did I not think of it? The
Uduntree!”
   “You know the place Binabik is talking about?” Simon was slowly
catching on.
   “Of course. It is an old, old legend of ours—a tree entirely of ice. The old
tales say that Udun made it grow so he could climb to the sky and make
himself king over all the gods.”
   “But what good is legend t’us?” Simon heard Haestan ask, but even as
the words came to his ears he felt a strange, heavy chill folding around him
like a blanket of sleet. The icy, white tree . . . he saw it again: the white
trunk stretching up into the darkness, the impenetrable white tower, a great,
looming pale stripe against the blackness . . . it stood squarely in the track
of his life, and somehow he knew there was no path around it . . . no way
around the slender, white finger—beckoning, warning, waiting.
   The white tree.
   “Because the legend tells where it is, too,” a voice said, echoing as if
down a long corridor. “Even if there is no such thing, we know that Sir
Colmund must have gone where the legend points—the northern face of
Urmsheim.”
   “Sludig is correct,” someone said . . . Binabik said. “We are needing only
to go where Colmund was going with Thorn—nothing else is having
importance.” The troll’s voice seemed very far away.
   “I think I . . . I have to go to sleep,” Simon said, his tongue thick. He got
up and stumbled away from the fire, practically unnoticed by the others,
who were talking animatedly of riding distances and mountain travel. He
curled up in his thick cloak and felt the snowy world revolve dizzyingly
around him. He shut his eyes and, though he still felt every pitch and yaw,
at the same time he began sliding heavily, helplessly down into dream-thick
sleep.

                                     •••

   All the next day they continued along the forested bight of snow between
the lake and the settling hills, hoping to make Haethstad at the lake’s
northeastern tip by late afternoon. If its inhabitants had not fled the harsh
winter and headed west, the companions decided, Sludig could go down by
himself and restock some of their stores. Even if it lay deserted, they could
perhaps take shelter in an abandoned hall for the night and dry out their
things before the long trip across the waste. Thus, it was with some
anticipation they traveled, making good time along the lakeshore.
   Haethstad, a village of some two dozen longhouses, stood on a
promontory of land scarcely wider than the town itself; seen from the
hillside above, the village seemed to sprout from the frozen lake.
   The cheering effect of their first glimpse lasted only about halfway down
the sloping road into the vale. It became increasingly obvious that although
the buildings stood, they were no more than burned-out shells.
   “Damn my eyes,” Sludig said angrily, “this is not just a village
abandoned, troll. They were driven out.”
    “If they were lucky enow t’get out at all,” Haestan muttered.
    “I think I must be agreeing with you, Sludig,” Binabik said. “Still we
must go and look there, to see how recent this burning is.”
    As they rode down to the bottom of the glen, Simon stared at the
scorched remains of Haethstad, and could not help remembering the
calcined skeleton of Saint Hoderund’s abbey.
    The priest at the Hayholt always used to say fire purifies, he thought. If
that’s true, then why does fire, does burning, frighten everyone? Well, by the
Aedon, I suppose no one wants to be purified that thoroughly.
    “Oh, no,” Haestan said. Simon almost ran into him as the big guardsman
reined up. “Oh, the good God,” he added.
    Simon peered around him to see a line of dark shapes filing out of the
trees near the village, moving slowly into the snowy road not a hundred ells
before them—men on horseback. Simon counted them as they made their
way out into the open . . . seven, eight, nine. They were all armored. The
leader wore a black iron helm shaped like a hound’s head, showing the
profile of the snarling muzzle as he turned to give orders. The nine started
forward.
    “That one—the dog-headed one.” Sludig pulled his axes out and pointed
at the approaching men. “He is the one who led the ambush on us at
Hoderund’s. He is the one I owe for young Hove, and the monks at the
abbey!”
    “Never’ll we take ’em,” Haestan said calmly. “They’ll carve us up—nine
men t’six, and two of us a troll and boy.”
    Binabik said nothing, but calmly unscrewed his walking stick, which had
been thrust beneath the cinch strap of Qantaqa’s saddle. As he reassembled
it, a matter of instants only, he said: “We must run.”
    Sludig was already spurring his horse forward, but Haestan and
Ethelbearn reached him within a couple of paces and caught at his elbows.
The Rimmersman, who had not even donned his helmet, tried to shake them
off; he had a distant look in his blue eyes.
    “God damn’t, man,” Haestan said, “come on! At least we’ve got chance
in ’mong th’ trees!”
    The leader of the approaching riders shouted something, and the others
kicked their horses into a trot. White mist flurried up from the horses’
hooves as though they ran on sea foam.
   “Turn ’im!” Haestan shouted to Ethelbearn, grabbing the reins of
Sludig’s horse as he himself wheeled about; Ethelbearn gave a smart smack
with his sword hilt to the flank of the Rimmersman’s mount and they spun
away from the oncoming riders, who were howling along at full gallop now
behind them, waving axes and swords. Simon was trembling so that he
feared he might fall from his saddle.
   “Binabik, where?” he shouted, his voice cracking.
   “The trees,” Binabik called back, as Qantaqa jumped forward. “Death it
would be to climb back up the road. Ride, Simon, and stay to me nearly!”
   Now the horses of his companions were rearing and kicking on all sides
as they headed off the wide path, away from the blackened ruins of
Haethstad. Simon managed to slide his bow from where it hung over his
shoulder, then leaned his head down over his horse’s neck and dug in the
spurs. With a bone-jarring surge they were suddenly leaping over the snow
and into the ever-thickening forest.
   Simon saw Binabik’s small back, and the bobbing gray of Qantaqa’s
hindquarters as the trees loomed up dizzyingly on all sides. Shouts echoed
from behind, and he looked back to see his other four companions in a close
knot, with the dark mass of their pursuers beyond, fanning out through the
forest. He heard a sound like the tearing of parchment, and for a brief
moment saw an arrow quivering in a tree trunk just before him.
   The muffled drumfire of hoofbeats was everywhere, filling his ears even
as he clung for his life to the pitching saddle. A whistling black thread was
suddenly drawn out and snapped before his face, and then another: the
pursuers were outflanking them, loosing their arrows almost broadside.
Simon heard himself scream something at the plunging shapes flashing
along beyond the nearer trees, and several more of the hissing darts snapped
past. Clinging to his pommel, he reached the hand that held the bow back to
draw an arrow from his jouncing quiver, but when he brought it forward he
saw it flash pale against his horse’s shoulder. It was the White Arrow—
what should he do?
   In a split instant that seemed much longer he pushed it back over his
shoulder into the quiver, pulling out another. A mocking voice somewhere
in his head laughed to see him picking and choosing arrows at such a
moment. He almost lost bow and arrow both as his horse lurched around a
snow-spattered tree that seemed to leap up in their path. A moment later he
heard a shout of pain and the terrified, terrifying scream of a falling horse.
He darted a look over his shoulder to see only three of his companions
behind him, and—farther behind every moment—a thrashing tangle of arms
and kicking horselegs and roiling snow. The pursuers went over and around
the downed rider, undeterred.
   Who was it? was his brief, flickering thought.
   “Up the hill, the hill!” Binabik shouted hoarsely from somewhere to
Simon’s right. He saw the flag of Qantaqa’s tail as the wolf leaped up an
incline into heavier trees, a thick clot of pines that stood like uncaring
sentinels as the shouting chaos slashed past them. Simon yanked hard on his
right-hand rein, having no idea if the horse would pay him any heed at all; a
moment later they canted to the side and bolted up the slope behind the
bounding wolf. The other three companions rushed past him, pulling up
their steaming horses within the sparse shelter of a crown of staff-straight
trunks.
   Sludig still wore no helmet, and the thin one was surely Grimmric, but
the other man, bulky and helmeted, had gone a short way up the slope;
before Simon could turn to see who it was he heard a hoarse shout of
triumph. The riders were upon them.
   After a frozen moment he nocked his arrow and lifted the bow, but the
whooping attackers were moving in and out among the trees so quickly that
his shot flew harmlessly over the head of the nearest man and disappeared.
Simon let fly a second arrow, and thought he saw it strike the leg of one of
the armored riders. Somebody shouted in pain. Sludig, with an answering
howl, spurred his white horse forward, pulling his helm down over his head.
Two of the attackers peeled off from the pack and angled toward him.
Simon saw him duck the sword swipe of the first and, turning, crash his
axe-blade into the man’s ribs as he swept past, bright blood rilling from the
gash in the man’s armor. As he turned from the first man the second nearly
caught him; Sludig had time only to deflect the man’s swing with his other
axe, but still took a clanging blow to the helmet. Simon saw the
Rimmersman wobble and almost fall as the attacker wheeled around.
   Before they came together again, Simon heard an ear-piercing screech
and pivoted to see another horse and rider stagger toward him, a troll-less
Qantaqa teeth-clinging to the man’s unarmored leg, scrabbling with her
claws at the shrilling horse’s side. Simon pulled his sword from the
scabbard, but as the rider struck helplessly at the wolf his reeling steed
plunged into Simon’s own mount. Simon’s blade spiraled away, then he,
too, was briefly without weight or tether. A long instant later the air was
thumped from him as though by a giant’s fist. He skidded to a face-down
halt a short way from where his horse struggled with the other in a
panicked, whinnying knot. Through a biting mask of snow, Simon saw
Qantaqa pull herself out from beneath the two horses and sprint away. The
man, caught shrieking beneath, could not escape.
   Climbing painfully to his feet, spitting icy grit, Simon snatched at his
bow and quiver lying nearby. He heard the sounds of combat move away up
the hill and turned to follow on foot.
   Somebody laughed.
   Not twenty paces below him, seated astride a motionless gray horse, was
the man in the black armor who wore the head of a ravening hound. A stark,
pyramidal shape was blazoned in white on his black jerkin.
   “There you are, boy,” Dog-face said, deep voice tolling inside his helmet.
“I have been looking for you.”
   Simon turned and dug up the snowy hill, stumbling, sinking into the
knee-high drifts. The man in black laughed happily and followed.
   Picking himself up yet again, tasting his own blood from his torn nose
and lip, Simon stopped at last, backed against a leaning spruce. He grabbed
at an arrow and let the quiver drop, then nocked it and pulled back the
bowstring. The man in black stopped, still half a dozen ells below, tilting
his helmeted head to one side as if imitating the hound he resembled.
   “Now kill me, boy, if you can,” he mocked. “Shoot!” He spurred his
horse up the hill toward where Simon stood shivering.
   There was a hiss and a sharp, fleshy slap. Suddenly the gray horse was
rearing up, up, mane-flinging head thrown back, an arrow shuddering in its
breast. The dog-faced rider was thrown down hard into the snow; he lay as
if boneless, even as his twitching horse fell to its knees and rolled heavily
onto him. Simon stared with fascination. A moment later he was staring
with even more surprise at the bow he still held in his outstretched arm. The
arrow had not left the string.
   “H-Haestan . . . ?” he said, turning to look up the slope. Three figures
stood there, in a gap between the trees.
   They were none of them Haestan. They were none of them men. They
had bright, feline eyes, and their mouths were set in hard lines.
   The Sitha who had shot the arrow nocked another and lowered it until its
delicately quivering head came to a halt pointed at Simon’s eyes.
   “T’si im t’si’, Sudhoda’ya’,” he said, his small, newly-formed smile as
cold as marble. “Blood . . . as you say . . . for blood.”