
                             Jiriki’s Hunt




Simon stared helplessly at the black arrowhead, at the trio of thin
faces. His jaw trembled.
   “Ske’i! Ske’i!” a voice cried, “Stop!”
   Two of the Sithi turned to look up the hill to their right, but the one
coolly holding the bent bow never wavered.
   “Ske’i, ras-Zida’ya!” the small figure shouted, and then, leaping
forward, fell into a snow-churning roll to stop at last in a flurry of gleaming
powder a few paces from Simon.
   Binabik got slowly to his knees, coated in snow as though he had been
floured by a hurrying baker.
   “W-What?” Simon forced his numb lips to shape words, but the troll
signaled him to silence with an urgent flutter of his squat fingers.
   “Shhhh. Slowly be putting down the bow you are holding—slowly!” As
the boy followed this direction, Binabik spouted another rush of words in
the unfamiliar language, waving his hands imploringly at the unblinking
Sithi.
   “What . . . where are the others . . .” Simon whispered, but Binabik
silenced him again, this time with a small but violent head-shake.
   “No time is there, no time . . . for your life we are fighting.” The troll
raised his own hands in the air, and Simon, having dropped the bow, did the
same, turning his palms outward. “You have not, I am hoping, lost the
White Arrow?”
   “I . . . I don’t know.”
   “Daughter of the Mountains, I must hope not. Slowly drop your quiver.
There.” He sputtered out a little bit more of what Simon took to be Sithi-
tongue, then kicked at the quiver so that the arrows scattered across the
broken snow like dark jackstraws . . . all but one. Only its triangular tip,
pearl-blue like a liquid drop of sky, stood out against the surrounding
whiteness.
   “Oh, praise to the High Places,” Binabik sighed. “Staja Ame ine!” he
called to the Sithi, who watched like cats whose avian quarry has chosen to
turn and sing instead of fly away. “The White Arrow! You cannot be in
ignorance of this! Im sheyis t’si keo’su d’a Yana o Lingit!”
   “This is . . . rare,” the Sitha with the bow said, lowering it slightly. His
accent was odd, but his command of the Western Speech very good. He
blinked. “To be taught the Rules of Song by a troll.” His cold smile returned
briefly. “You may spare us your exhortations . . . and your crude
translations. Pick up your arrow and bring it here to me.” He hissed a few
words to the other two as Binabik bent to the quiver. They looked back once
more at Simon and the troll, then dashed up the hill with startling speed,
seeming to barely dimple the snow as they went, so quick and light were
their steps. The one remaining behind kept his arrow trained in Simon’s
general direction as Binabik went trudging forward.
   “Hand it toward me,” the Sitha directed. “Feathers first, troll. Now, step
back toward your companion.”
   He eased up on the bow to examine the slender white object, allowing
the arrow to slide forward until the string was almost slack and he could
hold the nocked arrow and bowstave in one hand. Simon was aware for the
first time of the shallow rasp of his own rapid breathing. He lowered his
shaking hands a bit as Binabik crunched to halt nearby.
   “It was given to this young man for a service he was rendering,” Binabik
said defiantly. The Sitha looked up at him and cocked a slanting eyebrow.
   He seemed, at Simon’s first glance, much like the first one of his kindred
Simon had seen—the same high-boned cheeks and strange, birdlike
movements. He was dressed in pants and jacket of shimmery white cloth,
dotted at shoulders, sleeves and waist with slender dark green scales. His
hair, almost black, but also with a strange greenish tinge, he wore in two
complicated braids, one falling before each ear. Boots, belt, and quiver were
of soft milk-hued leather. Simon realized that it was only the Sitha’s
position upslope, and silhouetted against the drab sky, that allowed him to
be clearly seen: if the Fair One were to stand against the snow, in a copse of
trees, he would be as invisible as the wind.
   “Isi-isi’ye!” the Sitha muttered feelingly, and turned to hold the arrow to
the shrouded sun. Lowering it, he stared wonderingly at Simon for a
moment, then narrowed his eyes.
   “Where did you find this, Sudhoda’ya?” he asked harshly. “How did one
such as you come by such a thing?”
   “It was given to me!” Simon said, color coming back into his cheeks and
strength to his voice. He knew what he knew. “I saved one of your people.
He shot it at a tree, then ran away.”
   The Sitha again looked him over carefully, and seemed about to say
something more. Instead, he turned his attention up the hillside. A bird
whistled a long, complex call, or so Simon thought at first, until he saw the
small movements of the white-clad Sitha’s lips. He waited, still as a statue,
until there came an answering trill.
   “Go now, before me,” he said, swinging around to gesture with his bow
at the troll and boy. They walked with difficulty up the steep slope, their
captor moving lightly behind them, slowly turning the White Arrow over
and over in his slender fingers.
   Within the space of a few hundred heartbeats they reached the rounded
top of the knoll and started down the other side. There, four Sithi crouched
around a tree-rimmed, snow-blanketed gully, the two Simon had already
seen, recognizable only by the bluish tint to their braided hair, and another
pair whose tresses were smoky gray—although, like the others, their golden
faces were unwrinkled. At the gully’s bottom, beneath the menacing
quadrangle of Sithi arrows, sat Haestan, Grimmric, and Sludig. They were
each one bloodied, and wore the hopelessly defiant expressions of cornered
animals.
   “Bones of Saint Eahlstan!” Haestan swore when he saw the new arrivals.
“Ah, God, boy, was hopin’ y’got away.” He shook his head. “Still, better
than bein’ a dead’un, I suppose.”
   “Do you see, troll?” Sludig said bitterly, his bearded face smeared with
red. “Do you see what we have called on ourselves? Demons! We should
never have mocked . . . that dark one.”
   The Sitha who held the Arrow, seemingly the leader, said a few words in
his language to the others and gestured for Simon’s companions to climb
from the pit.
   “Demons they are not,” Binabik said as he and Simon braced their legs to
help the others scramble up, a difficult task on the shifting snow. “They are
Sithi, and they will do us no harm. It is, after all is said, their own White
Arrow that is compelling them.”
   The Sithi’s leader gave the troll a sour look but said nothing. Grimmric
came gasping up onto level ground. “Sith . . . Sithi?” he said, struggling for
breath. A cut just below his scalp had painted his forehead with a solid
swath of crimson. “Now we’ve gone walkin’ into old, old stories, an’ that’s
sure. Sithi-folk! May Usires th’ Aedon protect us all.” He made the sign of
the Tree and wearily turned to help the staggering Sludig. “What
happened?” Simon asked. “How did you . . . what happened to . . . ?”
   “The ones who pursued us are dead,” Sludig said, sagging back against a
tree trunk. His byrnie was slashed in several places, and his helmet, which
dangled from his hand, was scraped and dented like an old pot. “We did for
some ourselves. The rest,” he flapped a limp hand at the Sithi guards, “fell
with bodies full of arrows.”
   “They’d shot us too, sure, if the troll hadna spoken in their tongue,”
Haestan said. He smiled faintly at Binabik. “We didna think bad of ye when
y’ran. Prayin’ for ye, we were.”
   “I went for finding Simon. He is my charge,” Binabik said simply.
   “But . . .” Simon looked around, hoping against hope, but saw no other
prisoner. “Then . . . then that was Ethelbearn who fell. Before we reached
the first hill.”
   Haestan nodded slowly. “’Twas.”
   “Damn their souls!” Grimmric swore. “Th’were Rimmersmen, those
murd’rin’ bastards!”
   “Skali’s,” Sludig said, eyes hard. The Sithi began making gestures for
them to get up. “Two of them wore the Kaldskryke raven,” he continued,
rising. “Oh, how I am praying to catch him with nothing between us but our
axes.”
   “You are waiting with a host of many others,” Binabik said.
   “Wait!” Simon said, feeling terribly hollow: this was not right. He turned
to the leader of the Sithi company. “You have been looking at my arrow.
You know my story is true. You cannot take us anywhere, or do anything,
until we see what has happened to our companion.”
   The Sitha looked at him appraisingly. “I do not know your story is true,
manchild, but we will find out soon enough. Sooner than you might wish.
As to the other . . .” He took a moment to survey Simon’s ragged party.
“Very well. We shall allow you to see to your other man.” He spoke to his
comrades, and they followed the men down the hill. The quiet company
passed the arrow-plumed corpses of two of their attackers, eyes wide and
mouths agape. Snow was already sifting back over their still forms,
covering the scarlet stains.
   They found Ethelbearn a hundred ells from the lake road. The broken
shaft of an ashwood arrow stood out from the side of his neck below his
beard, and his splayed, twisted posture told that his horse had rolled over
him in its death throes.
   “He wasna long a-dyin’,” Haestan said, tears standing in his eyes.
“Aedon be praised, ’twas quick.”
   They dug a hole for him as best they could, hacking at the hard ground
with swords and axes; the Sithi stood by, unconcerned as geese. The
companions wrapped Ethelbearn in his thick cloak and lowered him into the
shallow grave. When he was covered over, Simon pushed the dead man’s
sword into the earth as a marker.
   “Take his helmet,” Haestan said to Sludig, and Grimmric nodded.
   “He’d not wanted it t’go unused,” the other Erkynlander agreed.
   Sludig hung his own ruined helm on the pommel of Ethelbearn’s sword
before taking the one held out to him. “We will avenge you, man,” the
Rimmersgarder said. “Blood for blood.”
   Silence settled over them. Snow filtered down through the trees as they
stood regarding the patch of naked ground. Soon it would all be white
again.
   “Come,” the Sitha chief said at last. “We have waited for you long
enough. There is someone who will want to see this arrow.”
   Simon was last to move. I scarcely had time to know you, Ethelbearn, he
thought. But you had a good loud laugh. I will remember that.
   They turned and headed back into the cold hills.
   The spider hung motionless, like a dull brown gem in an intricate
necklace. The web was complete, now, the last strands laid delicately in
place; it stretched from one side of the ceiling corner to the other, quivering
gently in the rising air as though strummed by invisible hands.
   For a moment Isgrimnur lost the thread of talk, important talk though it
was. His eyes had drifted from the worried faces huddled near the fireplace
in the great hall, roving up to the darkened corner, and to the tiny builder at
rest.
   There’s sense, he told himself. You build something and then you stay
there. That’s the way it’s meant to be. Not this running here, running there,
never see your blood-family or your home roofs for a year at a time.
   He thought of his wife: sharp-eyed, red-cheeked Gutrun. She had not
offered him a solitary word of rebuke, but he knew it angered her that he
had been gone so long from Elvritshalla, that he had left their oldest son,
the pride of her heart, to rule a great duchy . . . and to fail. Not that Isorn or
anyone else in Rimmersgard could have stopped Skali and his followers,
not with the High King behind him. Still, it had been young Isorn who had
been master while his father was gone, and it was Isorn who would be
remembered as the one who had seen the Kaldskryke clan, traditional
enemies of the Elvritshallamen, strut into the Longhouse as masters.
   And I was looking forward to coming home this time, the old duke
thought sadly. It would have been nice to tend to my horses and cows, and
settle a few local disputes, and watch my children raise their own children.
Instead, all the land is being torn up again like leaky thatch. God save me, I
had enough of fighting when I was younger . . . for all my talk.
   Fighting was, after all, mostly for young men, whose grip on life was
light and careless. And to give the old men something to talk about, to
remember when they sat warm in their halls with winter moaning outside.
   A damned old dog like me is just about ready to lie down and sleep by
the fire.
   He plucked at his beard, and watched the spider scramble toward the
darkened roof corner, where an unwary fly had made an unexpected stop.
   We thought John had forged a peace that would last a thousand years.
Instead, it has not survived his death by two summers. You build and you
build some more, laying strand over strand like that little fellow up there,
only to have a wind come along and blow everything to pieces.
   “. . . and so I have near-crippled two horses to bring these tidings as fast
as I could, Lord,” the young man finished as Isgrimnur turned his ear back
to the urgent discussion.
   “You have done magnificently, Deornoth,” Josua said, “Please rise.”
   His face still damp from his ride, the lank-haired soldier stood, wrapping
himself more tightly in the thick blanket the prince had given him. He
looked much as he had that other time, when, garbed in the costume of the
holy monk for the Saint Tunath’s Day festivities, he had brought the prince
news of his father’s death.
   The prince laid his hand upon Deornoth’s shoulder. “I am glad to have
you back. I feared for your safety, and cursed myself for having to send you
on such a dangerous errand.” He turned to the others. “So. You have heard
Deornoth’s report. Elias has at last gone into the field. He is bound for
Naglimund with . . . Deornoth? You said . . . ?”
   “Some thousand knights and more, and near ten thousand foot,” the
soldier said unhappily. “That averages the different reports in a way that
seems most reliable.”
   “I’m sure,” Josua waved his hand. “And we have perhaps a fortnight at
most until he is at our walls.”
   “I should think so, sire,” Deornoth nodded.
   “And what of my master?” Devasalles asked.
   “Well, Baron,” the soldier began, then clenched his teeth until a fit of
shivering had passed, “Nad Mullach was in a mad uproar—understandably,
of course, with what is happening to the west . . .” he broke off to look over
to Prince Gwythinn, who sat a short way off from the rest, staring miserably
at the ceiling.
   “Go on,” said Josua calmly, “we will hear it all.”
   Deornoth turned his gaze away from the Hernystirman. “So, as I said,
good information was hard to come by. However, according to several of
the rivermen up from Abaingeat on the coast, your Duke Leobardis has set
sail from Nabban, and is even now on the high seas, probably to make
landfall near Crannhyr.”
   “With how many men?” Isgrimnur rumbled.
   Deornoth shrugged. “Different people say different things. Three
hundred horse, perhaps, two thousand or so foot.”
   “That sounds correct, Prince Josua,” Devasalles said, lips pursed
contemplatively. “Many of the liege-lords doubtless would not go along,
frightened as they are of crossing the High King, and the Perdruinese will
stay neutral, as they usually do. Count Streáwe knows he will do better
helping both sides, and saving his ships to haul goods.”
   “So we may still hope for Leobardis’ strong help, although I might have
wished it stronger still.” Josua looked around the circle of men.
   “Even if these Nabbanai should beat Elias to the gate,” Baron Ordmaer
said, fear poorly hidden on his plump features, “still Elias will have three
times our numbers.”
   “But we have the walls, sir,” Josua replied, his narrow face stern. “We
are in a strong, strong place.” He turned back to Deornoth, and his
expression softened. “Give us the last of your news, my faithful friend, and
then you must sleep. I fear for your health, and I will need you strong in the
days ahead.”
   Deornoth mustered a faint smile. “Yes, sire. The tidings that are left are
not happy ones either, I fear. The Hernystiri have been driven from the field
at Inniscrich.” He started to glance at the place where Gwythinn sat, but
instead dropped his eyes. “They say King Lluth has been wounded, and his
armies have fallen back into the Grianspog Mountains, the better to harry
Skali and his men.”
   Josua looked gravely over to the Hernystiri prince. “So. It is at least
better than you feared, Gwythinn. Your father yet lives, and continues the
fight.”
   The young man turned. His eyes were red. “Yes! They continue the fight,
while I sit here inside stone walls, drinking ale and eating bread and cheese
like a fat townsman. My father may be dying! How can I stay here?”
   “And do you think you can beat Skali with your half-hundred men, lad?”
Isgrimnur asked, not unkindly. “Or would you seek a quick, glorious death,
rather than wait to see what is the best policy?”
   “I am not so foolish as that,” Gwythinn replied coldly. “And, Bagba’s
Herd, Isgrimnur, who are you to be saying such to me? What of that ‘foot of
steel’ you are saving for Skali’s guts?!”
   “Different,” Isgrimnur muttered, embarrassed. “I did not speak of
storming Elvritshalla with my dozen knights.”
   “And all I mean to do is steal around the flank of Skali’s ravens, and go
to my people in the mountains.”
   Unable to meet Prince Gwythinn’s bright, demanding stare, Isgrimnur let
his eyes slide back up to the roof corner, where the brown spider was
industriously wrapping something in clinging silk.
   “Gwythinn,” Josua said soothingly, “I ask only that you wait until we can
speak more. One or two days will make little difference.”
   The young Hernystirman stood up, his chair scraping against the stone
flags. “Wait! That is all that you do is wait, Josua! Wait for the local muster,
wait for Leobardis and his army, wait for . . . wait for Elias to climb the
walls and put Naglimund to the torch! I am tired of waiting!” He raised an
unsteady hand to forestall Josua’s protests. “Do not forget, Josua, I am a
prince, too! I came to you out of the friendship of our fathers. And now my
father is wounded, and harried by northern devils. If he dies unsuccored,
and I am become king, will you order me then? Will you still think to hold
me back? Brynioch! I cannot understand such craven reluctance!”
   Before he reached the door he turned. “I will tell my men to prepare for
our departure tomorrow at sunset. If you think of some reason why I should
not go, one that has escaped me, you know where I may be found!”
   As the prince flung the door shut behind him, Josua rose to his feet.
   “I think there are many here who . . .” he paused and shook his head
wearily, “who feel the need of some food and drink—you not least,
Deornoth. But I ask you to remain a short moment while these others go
ahead, so I may ask you of some private matters.” He waved Devasalles and
the rest off to the dining hall, and watched them shuffle out, talking quietly
among themselves. “Isgrimnur,” he called, and the duke stopped in the
doorway to look back inquiringly. “You stay also, please.”
   When Isgrimnur had settled himself in a chair again, Josua looked
expectantly to Deornoth.
   “And have you other news for me?” the prince asked. The soldier
frowned.
   “If I had aught else of good tiding, my prince, I would have told you
first, before the others arrived. I could find no trace of your niece or the
monk who accompanies her, but for one peasant farmer near the Greenwade
fork who saw a pair of their description fording the river there some days
ago, heading south.”
   “Which is no more than what we knew they would do, as the Lady
Vorzheva told us. But by now they are well into the Inniscrich, and the
Blessed Usires alone knows what may happen, or where they will go next.
Our only luck is that I am sure my brother Elias will march his army up the
skirt of the hills, since in this wet season the Wealdhelm Road is the only
safe place for the heavy wagons.” He stared at the wavering flames of the
fire. “Well, then,” he said at last, “my thanks, Deornoth. If all my liegemen
were such as you then I could laugh at the High King’s threat.”
   “The men are a good lot, sire,” the young knight said loyally.
   “Go on, now.” The prince extended his hand to pat Deornoth’s knee.
“Get some food, and then some sleep. You will not be needed for duty until
tomorrow.”
   “Yes, sire.” The young Erkynlander threw off his blanket and stood, his
back straight as a gatepost as he walked from the room. After he was gone,
Josua and Isgrimnur sat in silence.
   “Miriamele gone God knows where, and Leobardis racing Elias to our
gates.” The prince shook his head and kneaded his temples with his hand.
“Lluth wounded, the Hernystiri in retreat, and Elias’ tool Skali master from
the Vestivegg to the Grianspog. And atop all else, demons out of legend
walking the mortal earth.” He showed the duke a grim smile. “The net
grows tighter, Uncle.”
   Isgrimnur tangled his fingers in his beard. “The web is swaying in the
wind, Josua. A strong wind.”
   He left the remark unexplained, and silence crept back into the high hall.




   The man in the hound mask cursed weakly and spat another gobbet of
blood onto the snow. Any lesser man, he knew, would now be dead, lying in
the snow with his legs crushed and his ribs collapsed, but the thought was
only faintly gratifying. All the years of ritual training and hardening toil that
had saved his life when the dying horse rolled over him would be for
naught unless he could reach somewhere sheltered and dry. Another hour or
two of exposure would finish the work his dying steed had begun.
    The damnable Sithi—and their unexpected involvement was nothing
short of astonishing—had led their human captives within a few feet of
where he had lain hidden, buried under a half-foot of snow. He had
summoned all his reserves of strength and courage to stay preternaturally
still while the Fair Folk had scanned the area. They must have concluded he
had crawled away somewhere to die—which, of course, he had hoped they
would—and a few moments later they had continued on their way.
    Now he huddled shivering where he had dug out from beneath the
obscuring white blanket, summoning his strength for the next move. His
only hope was to somehow get back to Haethstad, where a pair of his own
men should now be waiting. He damned himself a hundred times for ever
trusting those louts of Skali’s—drunken pillagers and woman-beaters that
they were, unfit to polish his boots. If only he had not been forced to send
his own off on another mission.
    He shook his head in an attempt to clear it of the swirling, jiggling
specks of light that floated against the gradually darkening sky, then pursed
his cracked lips. The hoot of a snow owl issued incongruously from the
snarling hound muzzle. While he waited he tried once more, impossibly, to
stand—even to crawl. It was no use: something was gravely wrong with
both legs. Ignoring the scalding pain from his cracked ribs, he used his
hands to drag himself a little farther toward the trees, then had to stop, laid
flat out and panting.
    A moment later he felt hot wind, and lifted his head. The black muzzle of
his helmet was doubled, as though in some queer mirror, by a grinning
white snout only inches away.
    “Niku’a,” he gasped, in a language quite unlike his native Black
Rimmerspakk. “Come here, Udun damn you! Come!”
    The great hound took another step closer, until he loomed over his
injured master.
    “Now . . . hold,” the man said, reaching up strong hands to clasp the
white leather collar. “And pull!”
    A moment later he groaned in agony as the dog did pull, but he hung on,
teeth clenched and eyes bulging behind the unchanging canine features of
the helmet. The hammering, tearing pain almost pushed him over into
insensibility as the hound drew him bumping across the snow, but he did
not relax his grip until he had reached the cover of the trees. Only then did
he at last let go, let everything go. He slid down into darkness, and brief
surcease to pain.

                                     •••

    When he awoke the gray of the sky had gone several shades darker, and
the wind had swept a powdery layer of snow across him like a blanket. The
great hound Niku’a still waited, unconcerned and unshivering despite his
short fur, as though lounging before a blazing hearth. The man on the
ground was not surprised: he well knew the icy black kennels of
Sturmrspeik, and knew how these beasts were raised. Looking at Niku’a’s
red mouth and curving teeth, and the tiny white eyes like drops of some
milky poison, he was again grateful that it was he who followed the hounds,
and not the other way around.
    He pulled off the helmet—not without effort, since the fall had changed
its shape—and pitched it into the snow at his side. With his knife he cut his
black cloak into long strips; soon after he began laboriously sawing down
some of the slenderest young trees. It was horrible work on his agonized
ribs, but he did his best to ignore the flashing pain and go on. He had two
excellent reasons to survive: his duty to tell his masters of the unexpected
attack by the Sithi, and his own heightened desire for revenge on this ragtag
lot who had thwarted him too many times.
    The moon’s blue-white eye was peering curiously through the treetops
when he at last finished cutting. He used the strips of his cloak to bind a
number of the shorter staves tightly to each leg as splints; then, sitting with
his legs stiffly before him like a child playing noughts and crosses in the
dirt, he bound short crosspieces to the tops of the two long staves
remaining. Clutching them carefully he grabbed again at Niku’a’s collar,
letting the long, corpse-white dog drag him up onto his feet where he
swayed precariously until he could get the new-made crutches under his
arms.
    He took a few steps, swiveling awkwardly on his unbending legs. It
would do well enough, he decided, wincing at the sickening pain—not that
he had any choice.
   He looked at the snarling-mouthed helmet lying in the snow, thinking of
the effort it would take to reach it, and the now-useless weight of the thing.
Then he leaned down, gasping, and picked it up anyway. It had been given
him in the sacred caverns of Sturmrspeik, by Herself, when She named him
Her sacred hunter—he, a mortal! He could no more leave it lying in the
snow than he could leave his own beating heart. He remembered that
impossible, heady moment, the blue lights flickering in the Chamber of the
Breathing Harp, when he had knelt before the throne, before the serene
shimmer of Her silver mask.
   His excruciating pain lulled for a moment by the wine of memory,
Niku’a silently padding at his heels, Ingen Jegger moved haltingly down the
long, tree-covered hill, and began to think carefully about revenge.




   Simon and his companions, now lessened by one, did not have much
stomach for talk, nor did their captors encourage any. They trudged silently
and slowly through the snow-carpeted foothills as gray afternoon edged into
evening.
   Somehow the Sithi seemed to know exactly where they wanted to go,
although to Simon the pine-spotted slopes were featureless, one spot
indistinguishable from another. The leader’s amber eyes were always
moving in his masklike face, but he never seemed to be searching for
anything; rather he gave the impression that he read the subtle language of
the terrain as knowledgeably as Father Strangyeard surveyed his
bookshelves.
   The only time the Sitha leader displayed any reaction was early in their
march, when Qantaqa came trotting down an incline and fell in at Binabik’s
side, nose twitching as she sniffed his hand, tail nervously tucked. The Sitha
raised a half-curious eyebrow, then looked around to catch the glances of
his fellows, whose narrow eyes had narrowed further. He made no sign that
Simon could distinguish, but the wolf was allowed to pace along
unhindered.
   Daylight was fading when the strange walking-party turned north at last,
and within a short time they were slowly circling the base of a steep slope
whose snowy flanks were studded with jutting, naked stone. Simon, shock
and numbness worn off enough to make him all too aware of his achingly
cold feet, gave silent thanks as the chief of their captors waved them to a
halt.
    “Here,” he said, gesturing to a large outcropping that thrust up high
above their heads. “At the bottom.” He pointed again, this time to a wide,
waist-high fissure in the face of the stone. Before any of them could say a
word, two of the Sithi guards slipped nimbly past them and slid themselves
headfirst into the opening. In a moment they had vanished.
    “You,” he said to Simon. “Go after.”
    There were angry mutters from Haestan and the other two soldiers, but
Simon, despite his unusual situation, felt strangely confident. Kneeling, he
poked his head through the opening.
    It was a slender, shining tunnel, an ice-lined tube that twisted steeply up
and away from him, seemingly hollowed from the very stone of the
mountain. He decided that the Sitha who had gone before him must have
climbed up beyond the next bend. There was no sign of them, and no one
could hide in this glass-smooth, narrow passage, barely wide enough to
allow him to raise his arms.
    He ducked back out into the chill open air.
    “How can I go through it? It’s almost straight up, and it’s covered in ice.
I’ll just slide back down.”
    “Look above your head,” the chief Sitha replied. “You will understand.”
    Simon reentered the tunnel, pushing in a little farther so that his
shoulders and upper body were inside too, and he could turn on his back to
look up. The ice of the tunnel ceiling, if one could call something half an
arm’s length away a ceiling, was scored with a regular series of horizontal
cuts that extended the visible length of the passage. Each was a few inches
deep, and wide enough to hold both hands comfortably side by side. He
realized after some thought that he was intended to pull himself up with his
hands and feet, bracing his back against the floor of the tunnel.
    Viewing the prospect with some dismay, since he had no idea how long
the tunnel might be, or what else might conceivably be sharing it with him,
he considered backing out of the narrow passageway once more. After a
moment he changed his mind. The Sithi had shinnied up before him as
quickly as squirrels, and for some reason he felt the urge to show them that,
if not as nimble as they, he was still bold enough to follow without coaxing.
   The climb was difficult, but not impossibly so. The tunnel turned often
enough that he could make frequent stops to rest, bracing his feet against
the bends in the passage. As he slowly grabbed, pulled and braced, time
after muscle-cramping time, the advantage of such an entrance tunnel—if
this was, as it seemed, an entrance—became obvious: it was difficult going
to clamber up, and would be near-impossible for any animal but a two-
legged one; anyone who needed to get out could slide down it as swiftly as
a snake.
   He was just considering stopping for another rest when he heard voices
speaking the liquid Sithi language just beyond his head. A moment later
strong hands reached down, grasping him by the harness-straps of his chain
mail and pulling him upward. He popped out of the tunnel with a gasp of
surprise and tumbled onto a warm stone floor puddled with snowmelt. The
two Sithi who had dragged him out crouched by the passage mouth, faces
obscure in the near-darkness. The only light in the room—which was not
really a room so much as a rock cavern carefully swept clean of debris—
came from a door-sized crevice in the opposite wall. Through this gap
spilled a yellow gleam, painting a bright swath on the cavern floor. As
Simon pulled himself to his knees he felt a slender, restraining hand laid on
his shoulder. The dark-haired Sitha beside him pointed up at the low
ceiling, then made a waving motion and gestured at the tunnel mouth.
   “Wait,” he said calmly, his speech not as fluent as his leader’s. “We must
wait.”
   Haestan was next up, grumbling and cursing. The two Sithi had to worry
his bulky form out of the opening like a cork from a wine jug. Binabik
appeared on his heels—the nimble troll had easily caught up with the
Erkynlander—followed within a short while by Sludig and Grimmric. The
three remaining Sithi clambered lithely up behind them.
   No sooner had the last of the Fair Ones issued from the tunnel then the
party went forward again, passing through the rock doorway and into a
short passage beyond where they could at last stand upright. Lamps of some
kind of milky golden crystal or glass had been set into niches in the wall,
and their flickering light was enough to mask the glow of the door at the far
end until they were almost upon it. One of the Sithi stepped to this gap in
the stone, which unlike the last was shrouded with a hanging of dark cloth,
and called out. An instant later two more of their kindred pushed past the
cloth. Each of them held a short sword made of what looked to be some
dark metal. They stood silently alert, betraying no surprise or curiosity, as
the leader of the captors spoke.
   “We will bind your hands.” As he said this the other Sithi produced
coiled lengths of shiny black cord from beneath their clothing.
   Sludig stepped back a pace, bumping into one of the guards, who made a
quiet hissing noise but offered no violence.
   “No,” the Rimmersman said, his voice dangerously tight, “I will not let
them. No man will bind me against my will.”
   “Nor me,” Haestan said.
   “Don’t be foolish,” Simon said, and stepped forward, offering his own
crossed wrists. “We will probably get out of this with our skins, but not if
you start a fight.”
   “Simon is speaking rightly,” Binabik said, “I, too, will let them tie me.
You are not having sense if you do otherwise. Simon’s White Arrow is
genuine. It is being the reason they did not kill us, and why they brought us
here.”
   “But how can we . . .” Sludig began.
   “Also,” Binabik cut him off, “what would you plan for doing? Even if
these folk here you fought and overcame, and the others who most likely
wait beyond, what then? Should you slide downward through the tunnel
you would no doubt be crashing onto Qantaqa, who waits at the bottom. I
think such a startling thing would give you little chance to tell her you were
no enemy.”
   Sludig looked down at the troll for a moment, plainly thinking of the
possibilities attendant on being mistaken by a frightened Qantaqa. At last he
called up a weak smile.
   “Again you win, troll.” He put his hands forward.
   The black cords were cool and scaly like snakeskin, but flexible as oiled
leather thongs. Simon found that a couple of loops held his hands as
immobile as if they had been caught in an ogre’s fist. When the Sithi had
finished with the others, the group was led forward once more, through the
cloth-covered door and into a dazzling wash of light.
   It seemed, when Simon tried to remember it later, as though they had
stepped through the clouds and into a brilliant, shining land—some nearer
neighbor to the sun. After the bleak snows and the featureless tunnels, the
difference was like the wild carousal of the Ninth Day festival after the
eight gray days that preceded.
   Light, and its handmaiden color, was everywhere. The room was a rock
chamber less than twice a man’s height but very wide. Tree roots twined
graspingly down the walls. In one corner, thirty paces away, a glinting
stream of water ran down a grooved stone to arch, splashing, into a pond
cupped in a natural basin of stone. The delicate chime of its fall wound in
and out of the strange, subtle music that filled the air.
   Lamps like the ones that lined the stone hallway were everywhere,
casting, according to their making, beams of yellow, ivory, pale chalky blue
or rose, painting the stone grotto with a hundred different hues where they
ran against each other. In the center of the floor, not far from the edge of the
rippling pool, a fire was animatedly ablaze, the smoke vanishing into a
crevice above.
   “Elysia, Mother of the Holy Aedon,” Sludig said, awed.
   “Never know there was a rabbit hole here,” Grimmric shook his head,
“an’ they got a palace.”
   Perhaps a dozen Sithi, all male as far as Simon could tell on brief
inspection, were ranged about the chamber. Several of them sat calmly
before another pair seated on a high stone. One held a long flutelike
instrument and the other was singing; the music was so strange to Simon
that it took him a few moments before he could separate voice from flute,
and the continuing melody of the waterfall from either. Still, the exquisite,
quavering song they played tugged achingly at his heart even as it lifted the
short hairs on the back of his neck. Despite the unfamiliarity there was
something in it that made him want to sink down on the spot, never to move
again while such gentle music lasted.
   Those not gathered around the musicians were talking quietly, or merely
lying on their backs staring upward, as if they could gaze out through the
solid stone of the hillside and into the night sky beyond. Most turned briefly
to survey the captives at the chamber’s entrance, but in the manner, Simon
felt, that a man listening to a good story might lift his head to watch a cat
walk past.
    He and his companions, who had been quite unprepared for this, stood
gaping. The leader of their guards crossed the room toward the far wall,
where two more figures sat facing each other over a table that was a tall,
flattened knob of shiny white stone. Both stared intently at something on
the tabletop, lit by another of the strange lamps set in a niche in the rock
face close by. The warder stopped and stood quietly a short distance away,
as though waiting to be recognized.
    The Sitha who sat with his back to the companions was dressed in a
beautiful high-collared jacket of leaf-green, with pants and high boots of the
same shade. His long, braided hair was of a red even more fiery than
Simon’s, and his hands, as he moved something across the tabletop,
glittered with rings. Across from him, watching the movements of his hand
intently, sat one wrapped in a loose white robe rucked up around his
braceleted forearms, his hair a pale shade of heather or blue. A crow’s
feather, shiny black, hung down before one ear. Even as Simon watched, the
white-gowned Sitha flashed his teeth and spoke to his companion, then
reached out to slide some object forward. Simon’s stare grew more intense;
he blinked.
    It was the very Sitha-man he had rescued from the cotsman’s trap. He
was positive.
    “That’s him!” he whispered excitedly to Binabik. “The one whose arrow
it is!”
    Even as he spoke, their warder approached the table, and the one Simon
recognized looked up. The warder quickly said something, but the white-
robed one only flicked a glance over toward the prisoners and waved a
dismissive hand, returning his attention to what Simon had at last decided
was either some kind of map or gaming board. His red-haired companion
never turned, and a moment later their captor came back.
    “You must wait until Lord Jiriki has finished.” He brought his
expressionless gaze to bear on Simon. “Since the arrow is yours, you may
go unbound. The others may not.”
    Simon, only a stone’s throw from the one who had made the debt-pledge
but still being ignored, was tempted to push forward and confront the white-
robed Sitha—Jereekee, if that was his name. Binabik, who felt his tension,
bumped him in warning.
   “If the others must remain tied, then so will I,” Simon said at last. For the
first time he thought he saw something unexpected slide across his captor’s
face: a look of discomfort.
   “It is a White Arrow,” the guard leader said. “You should not be prisoned
unless it is proven you have come by it through foul means, but I cannot
free your companions.”
   “Then I will stay tied,” Simon said firmly.
   The other stared at him for a moment, then shuttered his eyes in a slow,
reptilian blink, reopening them to smile unhappily.
   “So it must be,” he said. “I do not like binding a bearer of the Staja Ame,
but I see little choice. On my heart it will be, right or wrong.” Then,
strangely, he bobbed his head in an almost respectful manner, fixing his
luminous eyes on Simon’s. “My mother named me An’nai,” he said.
   Caught off balance, Simon let a long moment pass until he felt Binabik’s
boot grinding on his toe. “Oh!” he said, “I am . . . my mother named me
Simon . . . Seoman, actually.” Then, seeing the Sitha nod, satisfied, he
hurriedly added: “and these are my companions—Binabik of Yiqanuc,
Haestan and Grimmric of Erkynland, and Sludig of Rimmersgard.”
   Perhaps, Simon thought, since the Sitha had seemed to place such
importance on the sharing of his name, this forced introduction would help
protect his companions.
   An’nai bobbed his head again and glided off, once more taking up a
position near the stone table. His fellow guards, after lending surprisingly
gentle help to the bound companions so that they could sit down, dispersed
around the cavern.
   Simon and the others talked quietly for a long while, hushed by the
strange twining music more than their situation.
   “Still,” said Sludig at last, after complaining bitterly about the treatment
they had received, “at least we are alive. Few who encounter demons are so
lucky.”
   “Y’r a top, Simon-lad!” Haestan laughed. “A spinnin’ top! Got the Fair
Folk bowin’ and scrapin’. Let’s be sure t’ask for bag o’ gold ’fore we go on
our way.”
   “Bowing and scraping!” Simon smirked in unhappy self-mockery. “Am I
free? Am I unbound? Am I eating supper?”
   “True.” Haestan shook his head sadly. “A bit’d go down nice. And a jar
or so.”
   “I am thinking we will receive nothing until Jiriki sees us,” Binabik said,
“but if he is indeed the person that Simon rescued, we may yet be eating
well.”
   “Do you think he’s important?” Simon asked. “An’nai called him ‘Lord
Jiriki.’”
   “If there is not more than one living of that name . . .” Binabik began, but
was interrupted by An’nai’s return. He was accompanied by the selfsame
Jiriki, who clutched in his hand the White Arrow.
   “Please,” Jiriki called two of the other Sithi over, “untie them now.” He
turned and said something rapid in his flowing tongue. The musical words
somehow had the sound of a reproach. An’nai accepted Jiriki’s
admonishment expressionlessly, if such it was, only lowering his eyes.
   Simon, carefully watching, was certain that minus the effects of hanging
in a trap, and the bruises and gashes of the cotsman’s attack, this was the
same Sitha.
   Jiriki waved a hand and An’nai walked away. Because of his confident
movements, and the deference that those around him showed, Simon had at
first taken him to be older, or at least of an age with the other Sithi. Now,
despite the strange timelessness of their golden faces, Simon suddenly felt
that the Lord Jiriki was, by Sithi standards anyway, still young.
   As the newly freed prisoners rubbed feeling back into their wrists, Jiriki
held up the arrow. “Forgive the wait. An’nai misjudged, because he knows
how seriously I take the playing of shent.” His eyes moved from the
companions to the arrow and back again. “I never thought to meet you
again, Seoman,” he said with a birdlike chin tilt, and a smile that never
quite reached his eyes. “But a debt is a debt . . . and the Staja Ame is even
more. You have changed since our first meeting. Then you looked more like
one of the forest animals than like your human kindred. You seemed lost, in
many ways.” His gaze burned brightly.
   “You’ve changed, too,” Simon said.
   A shadow of pain crossed Jiriki’s angular face. “Three nights and two
days I spent hanging in that mortal’s trap. Soon I would have died, even if
the woodsman had not come—from shame, that is.” His expression
changed, as if he had shut his hurt beneath a lid. “Come,” he said, “we must
give you food. It is unfortunate, but we cannot feed you as well as I would
like. We bring little with us to our,” he gestured around the chamber while
searching for the proper word, “hunting lodge.” Although he was far more
fluent with the Westerling speech than Simon would ever have dreamed at
their first meeting, still there was something halting yet precise in his
manner that indicated how alien that tongue was to him.
   “You are here to . . . hunt?” Simon asked as they were led forward to sit
before the fire. “What is it you hunt? The hills seem so barren now.”
   “Ah, but the game we seek is more plentiful than ever,” Jiriki said,
walking past them and toward a row of objects draped with a shimmering
cloth, set along one wall of the cavern.
   The green-clad, red-haired one stood up from the gaming table, where
Jiriki’s place had been taken by An’nai, and spoke in tones both questioning
and perhaps angry, all in the Sithi-speech.
   “Only showing our visitors the fruits of our hunt, Uncle Khendraja’aro,”
Jiriki said cheerfully, but again Simon felt something missing from the
Sitha’s smile.
   Jiriki crouched gracefully beside the row of covered objects, alighting
like a sea bird. With a flourish he pulled the shroud away, revealing a row
of half a dozen large, white-haired heads, dead features frozen in
expressions of snarling hatred.
   “Chukku’s Stones!” Binabik swore as the others gasped.
   It took Simon a shocked instant to recognize the leathery-skinned faces
for what they were.
   “Giants!” he said at last. “Hunën!”
   “Yes,” Prince Jiriki said, then turned. There was a flash of danger in his
voice. “And you, trespassing mortals . . . what do you hunt in my father’s
hills?”