
                       Songs of the Eldest




Deornoth woke in chill darkness, sweating. The wind hissed and
wailed outside, clawing at the shuttered windows like a flight of the lonely
dead. His heart leaped as he saw the dark shape looming over him,
silhouetted by the embers in the fireplace.
   “Captain!” It was one of the men, voice a panicked whisper. “There’s
someone comin’ down on th’ gate! Armed men!”
   “God’s Tree!” he cursed, struggling into his boots. Shrugging his
mailshirt over his head, he snatched up his scabbard and helmet and
followed the soldier out.
   Four more men were huddled on the top platform of the gatehouse,
hunkered down behind the rampart. The wind pushed him staggering, and
he quickly dropped into a crouch.
   “There, Captain!” It was the one who had awakened him. “Comin’ up th’
road through th’ town.” He leaned past Deornoth to point.
   The moonlight, shining through the streaming clouds, silvered the
shabby thatching of Naglimund-town’s huddled roofs. There was indeed
movement on the road, a small company of horsemen, perhaps a dozen in
number.
   The men on the gatehouse watched the riders’ slow approach. One of the
soldiers groaned quietly. Deornoth, too, felt the ache of waiting. It was
better when the horns were shrilling, and the field was full of shouting.
   It is this waiting that has unmanned us all, Deornoth thought. Once we
have been blooded again, our Naglimunders will do proudly.
   “There must be more, a-hidin’!” one of the soldiers breathed. “What
should we do?” Even with the crying of the wind, his voice seemed loud.
How could the approaching riders not hear?
   “Nothing,” Deornoth said firmly. “Wait.”
   The waiting seemed to last days. As the horsemen drew nearer, the moon
picked out shining spearpoints and the gleam of helmets. The silent riders
reined in before the massive gate, and sat as if listening.
   One of the gatemen stood, drawing his bow and sighting on the breast of
the leading rider. Even as Deornoth leaped toward him, seeing the straining
lines on the guardsman’s face, his desperate eye, there came a loud
pounding from below. Deornoth caught the bow arm and forced it up; the
arrow spat forth and out into the windy darkness over the town.
   “By the good God, open your door!” a man shouted, and once more a
spear-butt was thumped against the timbers. It was a Rimmersman’s voice,
with an edge almost, Deornoth thought, of madness. “Are you all asleep?!
Let us in! I am Isorn, Isgrimnur’s son, escaped from the hand of our
enemies!”




   “Look! See how the clouds break! Don’t you think that is a hopeful sign,
Velligis?”
   As he spoke, Duke Leobardis swung his pointing hand in a broad arc to
the cabin’s open window, nearly smacking his mailed arm against the head
of his sweating squire in the process. The squire ducked, swallowing a
silent oath as he juggled the duke’s greaves, and turned to cuff a young page
who had not gotten out of his way fast enough. The page, who had been
trying to make himself as unobtrusive as possible in the ship’s crowded
cabin, renewed his desperate efforts to shrink out of sight entirely.
   “Perhaps we are, in some way, the thin end of the wedge that will put an
end to this madness.” Leobardis clanked to the window, his squire
scrambling along the floor behind him, struggling to hold a half-fastened
greave in place. The gravid sky did indeed show long, rippled streaks of
blue, as if Crannhyr’s dark and bulky cliffs, looming over the bay where
Leobardis’ flagship Emettin’s Jewel rolled at close anchor, caught and tore
at the lowering clouds.
    Velligis, a great round man in golden escritorial robes, stumped to the
window to stand at the duke’s side.
    “How, my lord, can throwing oil on the fire help to extinguish it? It is, if
you will pardon my forwardness, folly to think so.”
    The hammering of the muster-drum echoed across the water. Leobardis
brushed lank white hair out of his eyes. “I know how the lector feels,” he
said, “and I know he directs you, beloved Escritor, to try and persuade me
out of this. His Sacredness’ love of peace . . . well, it is admirable, but it
will not come about by talking.”
    Velligis opened a small brass casket and shook out a sugar-sweet, which
he delicately placed on his tongue. “This is perilously close to sacrilege,
Duke Leobardis. Is prayer ‘talking’? Is the intercession of His Sacredness
the Lector Ranessin somehow of less validity than the force of your armies?
If that is so, then our faith in the word of Usires, and of his first acolyte
Sutrines, is a mockery.” The escritor sighed heavily, and sucked.
    The duke’s cheeks pinkened; he waved the squire away, bending creakily
to fasten the last buckle himself, then waved for his surcoat of rich blue
with the Benidrivine kingfisher gold-blazoned on the chest.
    “God bless me, Velligis,” he said testily, “but I haven’t the mind for
arguing with you today. I have been pushed too far by the High King Elias,
and now I must do what is needed.”
    “But you do not go into battle by yourself,” the large man said, speaking
with some heat for the first time. “You lead hundreds, nay, thousands of
men—of souls—and their well-being is in your care. The seeds of
catastrophe are fluttering in the wind, and Mother Church has a
responsibility to see they do not find fertile soil.”
    Leobardis shook his head sadly as the small page shyly lifted his golden
helmet, with its crest of blue-dyed horsehair.
    “Fertile soil is everywhere these days, Velligis, and catastrophe is already
growing—if you’ll forgive my theft of your poetic words. The thing is, we
must try and nip it while it is budding. Come.” He patted the escritor’s
fleshy arm. “It is time to go down to the landing-boat. Walk with me.”
    “Certainly, my good Duke, certainly.” Velligis turned slightly to the side
to ease through the narrow doorway. “You will forgive me if I do not
accompany you ashore just yet. I have been somewhat unsteady on my legs
of late. I am getting old, I fear.”
    “Ah, but your rhetoric has not lost its vigor,” Leobardis replied as they
moved slowly across the deck. A small figure wrapped in a dark robe
crossed his path, pausing to nod briefly, hands folded on its breast. The
escritor frowned, but Duke Leobardis returned the nod with a smile.
    “Nin Reisu has been with Emettin’s Jewel a long time,” he said, “and she
is the finest of seawatchers. I forgive her the formalities—Niskies are
strange folk anyway, Velligis, as you would know if you were a sailing
man. Come, my boat is this way.”
    The harbor wind made of Leobardis’ cloak a sail, billowing blue against
the uncertain sky.

                                    •••

   Leobardis saw his youngest son Varellan waiting at landfall, looking too
small to fill out his gleaming armor. His thin face peered anxiously from the
hollow of his helmet while he surveyed the gathering Nabbanai forces, as if
his father might hold him responsible for any slipshod formations among
the milling, swearing soldiers. Several of them pushed past him as
unconcernedly as if he were the drummer boy, cursing cheerfully at a pair
of horses who, frightened by the confusion, had leaped off the gangplank
into the shallow water, taking their handler with them. Varellan backed
away from the splashing, whinnying chaos, his forehead wrinkled in a
frown that did not go away even when he saw the duke step from the
grounded boat and wade the last few paces to the rocky shore of Hernystir’s
south coast.
   “My lord,” he said, and hesitated; Leobardis guessed he was wondering
whether to climb down from his horse and bend a knee. The duke had to
restrain a scowl. He blamed Nessalanta for the boy’s timidity, since she had
hung on to him as a drunkard to his jug, unwilling to admit that the last of
her children was grown. Of course, he perhaps owned some responsibility
himself. He should never have poked fun at the boy’s half-formed interest
in the priesthood. Still, that had been years ago, and there was no turning
the boy’s path now; he would be a soldier if it killed him.
   “So, Varellan,” he said, and looked around. “Well then, my son, it looks
as though all is in good order.”
   Although the evidence of his eyes told him his father was either mad or
overkind, the young man flashed a grateful smile. “We shall be unshipped
in two hours, I would say. Will we march tonight?”
   “After a week at sea? The men would kill us both and find a new ducal
family. Although I suppose they would have to dispatch Benigaris, too, if
they wanted to finish the line. Speaking of your brother, why is he not
here?”
   He spoke lightly, but he found the absence of his eldest child irritating.
After weeks of bitter argument over whether Nabban should cling to
neutrality, and a stormy reaction to the duke’s decision to support Josua,
Benigaris had turned his coat and announced his desire to ride with his
father and the armies. Benigaris could not give up an opportunity to lead the
Legions of the Kingfisher in battle, the duke felt sure, even if it meant
giving up a chance to rest his hocks for a short while on the throne of the
Sancellan Mahistrevis.
   He realized he was woolgathering. “No, no, Varellan, we must give the
men a night in Crannhyr, although merrymaking may prove scarce with
Lluth’s war gone so poorly to the north. Where did you say Benigaris was?”
   Varellan colored. “I didn’t, my lord. I’m sorry. He rode up to the town
with his friend Count Aspitis Preves,”
   Leobardis ignored his son’s discomfort. “By the Tree, I would not have
thought it too much to expect my son and heir to meet me. Well, so, let us
go and see how things are with our other commanders.” He snapped his
fingers and the squire brought the duke’s horse up, harness bells jingling.

                                     •••

   They found Mylin-sá-Ingadaris underneath his house’s white and red
albatross banner. The old man, who had been Leobardis’ cordial enemy for
years, hailed the duke over. He and Varellan sat watching as Mylin oversaw
the final unloading of his two carracks, then joined the old earl in his striped
tent for a flagon of sweet Ingadarine wine.
   After talking marching squares and fewtering—and putting up with
Varellan’s half-successful attempts to join in—Leobardis thanked Earl
Mylin for his hospitality and went out, youngest son trailing behind. Taking
the reins back from their squires, they continued on through the bustling
encampment, paying brief courtesy visits to the camps of some of the other
nobles.
   The pair had just turned about to ride back up the strand when the duke
caught sight of a familiar figure on a big-chested roan charger, sauntering
down the road from town with another rider at his side.
   Benigaris’ silver armor, his most cherished possession, was so thick with
engravings and costly tracings of ilenite inlay that light declined to reflect
from it properly, making it appear almost gray. Corseted by his breastplate,
which corrected the overabundancy of his figure, Benigaris looked every
inch a brave and doughty knight. Young Aspitis beside him also wore armor
of beautiful workmanship: the family osprey crest had been inlaid on his
breastplate in mother of pearl. He wore no surcoat that might cover it up,
but went, like Benigaris, plated all over like a gleaming crab.
   Benigaris said something to his companion; Aspitis Preves laughed, then
rode away. Benigaris came down the road, crunching across the gravelly
beach toward his father and younger brother.
   “That was Count Aspitis, was it not?” Leobardis asked, trying to keep the
bitterness he felt in the back of his throat from his voice. “Is the Prevan
House now become our enemy, that he cannot come and salute his duke?”
   Benigaris leaned over in his saddle and patted his horse’s neck.
Leobardis could not see if he looked up through his thick, dark brows. “I
told Aspitis that you and I would speak privately, Father. He would have
come, but I sent him away. He went out of respect for you.” He turned to
Varellan, who looked aswim in his bright armor, and gave the boy a brief
nod.
   Feeling slightly overbalanced, the duke changed the subject. “What took
you to town, my son?”
   “News, sire. I thought Aspitis, since he has been here before, might help
me to gather useful tidings.”
   “You were gone a long time.” Leobardis could not summon the strength
to be angry. “What did you find, Benigaris—anything?”
   “Nothing we had not already heard from the Abaingeat boats. Lluth is
wounded and has fallen back to the mountains. Skali controls
Hernysadharc, but has not the armies to extend himself any farther, not until
the Hernystirmen in the Grianspog have been subdued. So the coast is yet
free, and all the ground this side of the Ach Samrath—Nad Mullach,
Cuihmne, all the river lands up to Inniscrich.”
   Leobardis rubbed his head, squinting at the glaring streak the sun made
on the surface of the ocean. “Perhaps we could best serve Prince Josua if we
were to break this nearer siege. If we were to bring our two thousand men
against Skali Sharp-nose’s back, Lluth’s armies would be freed up—what’s
left of them—and Elias’ back would be naked as he lays siege to the
Naglimund.”
   He weighed the plan and liked it. It seemed to him something his brother
Camaris might have done: swift, forceful, a stroke like a snapping whip.
Camaris had always approached warfare like the pure weapon he was, as
straightforward and unhesitating as a shining hammer.
   Benigaris was shaking his head, something like real alarm on his face.
“Oh, no, sire! No! Why, if we were to do that, all Skali would have to do is
melt into the Circoille, or climb up into the same Grianspog mountains.
Then we would be pegged down like a stretched hide, waiting for the
Rimmersmen to come out. Meanwhile Elias would reduce Naglimund and
be free to turn on us. We would be cracked like a hazelnut between the High
King and the Raven.” He shook his head emphatically, as if the idea
frightened him.
   Leobardis turned away from the dazzling sun. “I suppose you make good
sense, Benigaris . . . although I seem to remember you arguing differently
not long ago.”
   “That was until you made your decision to put the army in the field, my
lord.” Benigaris lifted his helmet and rolled it in his hands for a moment
before hanging it back on his pommel. “Now that we are committed, I am a
Nascadu lion.”
   Leobardis took a deep breath. The tang of war was in the air, and it was a
scent that filled him with unease and regret. Still, the sundering of Osten
Ard after the long years of John’s peace—the High King’s Ward—seemed
to have brought his headstrong son back to his side. It was something for
which to be grateful, however insignificant in the tide of greater events. The
Duke of Nabban offered a silent prayer of thanks to his confusing but
ultimately beneficent God.
   “Praise Usires Aedon for bringing you back to us!” Isgrimnur said, and
felt tears coming again. He leaned over the bed and gave Isorn’s shoulder a
rough, joyful shake, earning a sharp glance from Gutrun, who had not left
her grown son’s side since he had come in the night before.
   Isorn, no stranger to his mother’s stern ways, grinned weakly up at
Isgrimnur. He had the duke’s blue eyes and broad features, but much of the
sheen of youth seemed to have vanished since his father had seen him last:
he was drawn, shadowed. Something seemed to have been drained from
him, for all his stock-shouldered bulk.
   It’s just hardship and worry that’s been at him, the duke decided. He’s a
strong boy. Look at him, how he puts up with his mother’s fussing. He’ll be
a fine man—no. He is a fine man. When he’s duke after me . . . after we send
Skali shouting down to Hell . . .
   “Isorn!” A new voice sent the errant thought fluttering away. “It is a
miracle to have you back among us.” Prince Josua leaned forward and
clasped Isorn’s hand with his own left hand. Gutrun nodded approvingly.
She did not rise to curtsy to the prince, motherhood apparently overriding
manners on this occasion. Josua did not seem to mind.
   “The devil it’s a miracle,” Isgrimnur said gruffly, and frowned to keep
his swelling heart from causing him any embarrassment. “He got ’em out
through wits and courage, and that’s God’s truth.”
   “Isgrimnur . . .” Gutrun warned him. Josua laughed.
   “Of course. Let me say then, Isorn, that your courage and wit were
miraculous.”
   Isorn sat higher in the bed, readjusting the bandaged leg that lay pillowed
atop the coverlet like the relic of a saint. “That’s far too kind, Your
Highness. Had not some of Skali’s Kaldskryke-men been without the
stomach for torture of their fellows, we would be there still—as ice-
stiffened corpses.”
   “Isorn!” his mother said, annoyed. “Do not speak of such things. It flies
in the face of God’s mercy.”
   “But it’s true, Mother. Skali’s own Ravens gave us the knives that
permitted our escape.” He turned to Josua. “There are dark things afoot in
Elvritshalla—over all of Rimmersgard, Prince Josua! You must believe me!
Skali is not alone. The town was full of Black Rimmersmen out of the lands
around Stormspike. It was them that Sharp-nose left to guard us. It was
those God-cursed monsters who tortured our men—for nothing! We had
nothing to hide from them! They did it for pleasure, if such a thing can be
imagined. Nights we went to sleep hearing the cries of our fellows,
wondering who they would take next.”
    He moaned softly and lifted his hand from Gutrun’s restraining grasp to
rub at his temples, as if to scour the memory. “Even Skali’s own men found
it sickening. I think they are beginning to wonder what their thane has
gotten them into.”
    “We believe you,” Josua said gently; the look he lifted to standing
Isgrimnur was etched with worry.
    “But there were others, too—ones who came by night, hooded in black.
Even our guards did not see their faces!” Although Isorn’s voice remained
quiet, his eyes were round in the remembering. “They did not even move
like men—the Aedon be my witness! They were out of the cold wastes
beyond the mountains. We could feel the chill of them as they passed our
prison! We were more frightened of being near to them than of all the Black
Rimmersmen’s hot irons.” Isorn shook his head and lay back on the pillow.
“I am sorry, Father . . . Prince Josua. I am very tired.”

                                   •••

   “He is a strong man, Isgrimnur,” the prince said as they walked up the
puddled corridor. The roof here was leaking, as so many were in Naglimund
after a winter of hard weather, and a spring and summer of the same.
   “I only wish I had not left him alone to face that whoreson Skali. Be-
damned!” Skidding on the wet stone, Isgrimnur cursed his age and
clumsiness.
   “He did all that could be done, Uncle. You should be proud of him.”
   “I am.”
   They walked on for a while before Josua spoke. “I must confess, having
Isorn here makes it easier for me to ask of you . . . what I must ask.”
   Isgrimnur tugged at his beard. “And what is that?”
   “A boon. One that I would not beg if . . .” He hesitated. “No. Let us go to
my chamber. This is a thing that should be discussed in solitude.” He
hooked his right arm through the duke’s elbow, the leather-capped stump on
his wrist a mute reproach in advance of any rejection.
   Isgrimnur tugged at his beard again until it hurt. He had a feeling he
would not like what he was about to hear. “By the Tree, let’s get a jug of
wine to take with us, Josua. I sorely need it.”

                                    •••

   “For the love of Usires! By the crimson mallet of Dror! The bones of
Saint Eahlstan and Saint Skendi! Are you mad?! Why should I leave
Naglimund?” Isgrimnur trembled in surprise and anger.
   “I would not ask it if there was any other way, Isgrimnur.” The prince
spoke, patiently, but even through the mist of his rage the duke could see
the anguish Josua felt. “I have lain awake two nights without sleep, trying
to think of another way. I cannot. Somebody must find the Princess
Miriamele.”
   Isgrimnur took a long swallow of wine, feeling some dribble down his
beard, but not caring. “Why?” he said at last, and set the jar down with a
table-rattling thump. “And why me, God damn it all? Why me?”
   The prince was all strained patience. “She must be found because she is
vitally important . . . as well as my only niece. What if I die, Isgrimnur?
What if we hold off Elias, break the siege, but I stop an arrow, or tumble
from the castle wall? Who will the people rally behind—not just the barons
and the warlords, but the common people, those who came flocking into my
walls for protection? It will be hard enough to fight Elias with me at your
head—strange and fickle as I am thought—but what if I die?”
   Isgrimnur stared at the floor. “There is Lluth. And Leobardis.”
   Josua shook his head harshly. “King Lluth is wounded, maybe dying.
Leobardis is the Duke of Nabban—at war with Erkynland within the
memory of some. The Sancellan itself is a reminder of a time when Nabban
ruled all. Even you, Uncle, good and much-respected man as you are, could
not hold a force together that would stand against Elias. He is a son of
Prester John! He was raised to the Dragonbone Chair by John himself. For
all his wicked deeds, it will take someone from the family to unseat him . . .
and you know it!”
   Isgrimnur’s long silence was his answer.
   “But why me?” he said at last.
   “Because Miriamele would not come back for anyone else I could send.
Deornoth? He is as brave and as loyal as a hunting hawk, but he would have
to carry the princess back to Naglimund in a sack. Beside myself, you are
the only one who could ever bring her unresisting, and she must come
willingly, for it would be disaster if you were found out. Soon enough Elias
may discover she is gone, and then he will set the south afire to find her.”
   Josua walked to his desk and absently ruffled a stack of parchments.
“Think carefully, Isgrimnur. Forget for a moment that it is yourself we
speak of. Who else has traveled as far, and has as many friends in strange
places? Who else, if you will forgive me, has seen the wrong end of so
many dark alleys in Ansis Pelippé and Nabban?”
   Isgrimnur grinned sourly, in spite of himself. “But still it makes no sense,
Josua. How can I leave my men, with Elias coming against us? And how
could I hope to perform such a secret thing, well known as I am?”
   “For the first, that is why it seems to me a sign from God that Isorn has
come. Einskaldir, we both would agree, has not the restraint to command.
Isorn does. Anyway, Uncle, he deserves the chance to make good.
Elvritshalla’s fall has battered his young pride.”‘
   “It’s battered pride that makes a boy a man,” the duke growled. “Go on.”
   “As to the second, well, you are well-known, but you have been seldom
south of Erkynland in twenty years. In any case, we shall disguise you.”
   “Disguise?” Isgrimnur pawed distractedly at the braids of his beard as
Josua walked to his chamber door and called out. The duke had a strange,
heavy feeling around his heart. He had been dreading the fighting, not so
much for himself as for his people, his wife . . . now his son was here, too,
giving him another stone of worry to carry. But to leave, even riding into
danger as great as he left behind . . . it seemed unsupportably like
cowardice, like treason.
   But I was sworn to Josua’s father—my dear old John—how can I not do
what his son asks? And his arguments make all too much be-damned sense.
   “Here,” the prince said, stepping away from the door to allow someone
in. It was Father Strangyeard, his pink, eye-patched face creased in a shy
smile, tall frame stooped over his burden: a bundle of dark cloth.
    “I hope it fits,” he said. “They seldom do; I don’t know why, just another
gentle reminder, another of the Master’s little burdens.” He trailed off, then
seemed to find the thread again. “Eglaf was most kind to lend it. He is about
your size, I think, although not quite so tall.”
    “Eglaf?” Isgrimnur said, mystified. “Who is Eglaf? Josua, what is this
nonsense?”
    “Brother Eglaf, of course,” Strangyeard explained.
    “Your disguise, Isgrimnur,” Josua amplified. The castle archivist shook
out the bundle, revealing a woolen set of black priestly vestments. “You are
a devout man, Uncle,” the prince said. “I am sure you will be able to carry it
off.” The duke could have sworn Josua was resisting a smile.
    “What? Priest’s robes?” Isgrimnur was beginning to see the outlines of
the thing, and he was not pleased.
    “How better to pass unnoticed in Nabban, where Mother Church is
queen, and priests of every stripe nearly outnumber the rest of the citizens?”
Josua was smiling.
    Isgrimnur was furious. “Josua, I feared for your wits before, but now I
know you have lost them completely! This is the maddest scheme I have
ever seen! And on top of everything else, who ever heard of an Aedonite
priest with a beard?!” He snorted scornfully.
    The prince—with a warning glance to Father Strangyeard, who put the
robes down on a chair and backed toward the door—walked to his table and
lifted a cloth, revealing . . . a basin of hot water, and a gleaming, fresh-
stropped razor.
    Isgrimnur’s eruptive bellow rattled the very crockery in the castle kitchen
below.




   “Speak, mortal men. Do you come to our hills as spies?”
   A chilly silence followed Prince Jiriki’s words. From the corner of his
eye Simon watched Haestan reach backward, feeling along the wall for
something to use as a weapon; Sludig and Grimmric glared at the Sithi who
surrounded them, certain that any moment they would be set upon.
   “No, Prince Jiriki,” Binabik said hastily. “Surely you are seeing we had
no expectations of finding your people here. We are from Naglimund,
Prince Josua’s sending, on an errand of terrible import. We are seeking . . .”
   The troll hesitated, as though afraid to say too much. Finally, with a
shrug, he continued.
   “We go to the dragon-mountain for searching Camaris-sá-Vinitta’s sword
Thorn.”
   Jiriki narrowed his eyes, and behind him the green-clad one he had called
his uncle let out a thin whistle of breath.
   “What would you do with such a thing?” Khendraja’aro demanded.
   Binabik would not answer this, but stared unhappily at the cavern floor.
The very air seemed to thicken as the moments passed.
   “It’s to save us from Ineluki the Storm King!” Simon blurted out. None
of the Sithi moved a muscle except to blink. No one said a word.
   “Speak more,” Jiriki said at last.
   “If we must,” Binabik said. “It is part of a story near as long as your
Ua’kiza Tumet’ai nei-R’i’anis—the Song of the Fall of Tumet’ai. We will
try for telling you what we can.”
   The troll hurriedly explained the main facts. It seemed to Simon that he
deliberately omitted many things; once or twice in the telling Binabik
looked up and caught his eye, seemingly warning him to silence.
   Binabik told the silent Sithi of Naglimund’s preparations and the crimes
of the High King; he explained the words of Jarnauga, and the book of
Nisses, reciting the rhyme that led them on toward Urmsheim.
   The finish of the story left the troll facing Jiriki’s bland stare, the uncle’s
more skeptical expression, and a silence so complete that the ringing echo
of the waterfall seemed to swell until it filled the whole world with noise.
What a place of madness and dreams this was, and what a mad story they
were suddenly living in! Simon felt his heart racing, but not from fear
alone.
   “This is hard to credit, son of my sister,” Khendraja’aro said at last,
spreading his beringed hands in an unfamiliar gesture.
   “It is, Uncle. But I think this is not the time to speak of it.”
   “But the other one the boy spoke of . . .” Khendraja’aro began, his
yellow eyes troubled, his voice full of building anger. “The black one below
Nakkiga . . .”
   “Not now.” There was an edge to the Sithi prince’s voice. He turned to
the five outsiders. “Apologies are called for. It is not good that we should
discuss such things while you still have not eaten. You are our guests.”
Simon felt a wave of relief at these words and swayed a little, his knees
suddenly weak.
   Noticing this, Jiriki waved them toward the fire. “Sit down. We must be
forgiven for our suspicion. Understand, although I owe you blood debt,
Seoman—you are my Hikka Staja—your race has done ours little
kindness.”
   “I must be disagreeing with you in a part, Prince Jiriki,” Binabik replied,
seating himself on a flat rock near the fire. “Of all Sithi, your family should
be knowing that we Qanuc have never brought you any harm.”
   Jiriki looked down on the little man, and his taut features relaxed into an
expression almost of fondness. “You have caught me in ungraciousness,
Binbiniqegabenik. After only the Western men, whom we knew best, we
once loved the Qanuc well.”
   Binabik lifted his head, a look of astonishment on his round face. “How
are you knowing my full name? I have not given mention of it, and my
companions have not been either.”
   Jiriki laughed, a hissing sound, but strangely cheering, with not a hint of
insincerity. In that moment Simon felt a fierce, sudden liking for him.
   “Ah, troll,” the prince said, “someone as traveled as you are should not
be surprised that your name is known. How many Qanuc beside your
master and yourself are ever seen south of the mountains?”
   “You were knowing my master? He is dead now.” Binabik pulled off his
gloves and flexed his fingers. Simon and the others were finding seats of
their own.
   “He knew us,” Jiriki said. “Did he not teach you to speak our language?
You said the troll spoke to you, An’nai?”
   “He did, my prince. Mostly correctly.”
   Binabik flushed, pleased but embarrassed. “Ookequk was teaching me
some, but he never told me where he had been learning it. I had the thought
perhaps his master had given it to him.”
   “Sit now, sit,” said Jiriki, gesturing for Haestan, Sludig and Grimmric to
follow Simon and Binabik’s example. They came like dogs who fear a
beating and found themselves places near the fire. Several of the other Sithi
approached bearing salvers of intricately carved and polished wood, high-
laden with all manner of things: butter and dark brown bread, a wheel of
pungent, salty cheese, small red and yellow fruits that Simon had never
seen before. There were also several bowls of quite recognizable berries,
and even a pile of slow-dripping honeycombs. When Simon reached and
took two of the sticky combs, Jiriki laughed again, a quiet sibilance like a
jay in a distant tree.
   “Everywhere is winter,” he said, “but in the sheltered fastnesses of Jao é-
Tinukai’i, the bees do not know it. Take all you like.”
   Captors-turned-hosts now served the companions an unfamiliar but
potent wine, filling their wooden goblets from stone ewers. Simon
wondered if some prayer might be said before starting, but the Sithi had
already begun to eat. Haestan, Sludig, and Grimmric were looking around
miserably, wanting to begin but still full of fear and distrust. They watched
intently as Binabik broke bread and took a mouthful of buttered crust. Some
moments later, when he was not only still alive but eating merrily, the men
felt safe to attack the Sithi fare, which they did with the vigor of reprieved
prisoners.
   Dabbing honey from his chin, Simon paused to watch the Sithi. The Fair
Folk ate slowly, sometimes staring at a berry between their fingers for long
instants before lifting it to their mouths. There was little speech, but when
one of them made some remark in their liquid tongue, or gave voice to a
brief trill of song, all the others listened. Most often there was no response,
but if one of them had some answer they all listened to that, too. There was
much quiet laughter, but no shouting and no arguing, and Simon never
heard anyone interrupt while another was speaking.
   An’nai had moved over to sit near Simon and Binabik. One of the Sithi
made a solemn statement that drew a laugh from the others. Simon asked
An’nai to explain the joke.
   The white-jacketed Sitha looked slightly uncomfortable. “Ki’ushapo said
that your friends eat as though they fear their food might run away.” He
gestured to Haestan, who was pushing food into his mouth with both hands.
   Simon was not sure what An’nai meant—surely they had seen hungry
people before?—but he smiled anyway.
   As the meal wore on, and a seemingly inexhaustible river of wine
replenished the wooden goblets, the Rimmersman and the two Erkynlandish
guardsmen began to enjoy themselves. At one point Sludig stood, tumbler
sloshing in his hand, and proposed a hearty toast to his new Sithi friends.
Jiriki smiled and nodded, but Khendraja’aro stiffened; when Sludig swung
into an old northern drinking song, the prince’s uncle slipped quietly off to
the corner of the broad cavern to stare into the rippling, lamplit pond.
   The other Sithi at table laughed as Sludig sang the choruses in his
braying voice, and swayed to his tipsy rhythm, whispering occasionally
among themselves. Sludig and Haestan and Grimmric seemed quite happy
now, and even Binabik was grinning as he sucked on a pear rind—but
Simon, remembering the enthralling music he had heard the Sithi play, felt
a glow of shame for his companion, as though the Rimmersman were a
festival bear dancing for crumbs in Main Row.
   After watching for some while he got up, wiping his hands on his
shirtfront. Binabik rose, too, and after asking Jiriki’s permission went down
the covered passageway to have a look after Qantaqa. The three soldiers
were all laughing uproariously among themselves, telling, Simon had no
doubt, drunken soldier jokes. He walked to one of the wall niches to
examine the strange lamps. Abruptly he was reminded of the glowing
crystal Morgenes had given him—could it have been Sithi-work?—and felt
a cold, lonely tug at his heart. He lifted one of the lamps and saw a faint
shadow of the bones in his hand, as though the flesh was only muddied
water. Stare as he might, he could not fathom how the flame had been
introduced to the inside of the translucent crystal.
   Sensing someone watching, he turned. Jiriki was staring, cat-eyes agleam
on the far side of the fire circle. Simon started, surprised; the prince nodded.
   Haestan, the wine gone to his shaggy head, had challenged one of the
Sithi—the one An’nai had named Ki’ushapo—to wrist-wrestle. Ki’ushapo,
yellow-braided, dressed in black and gray, was receiving drunken advice
from Grimmric. It was clear why the skinny guardsman thought his aid
well-directed: the Sitha was a head shorter than Haestan, and looked to be
barely more than half his weight. As the Sitha, with a bemused expression,
leaned forward across the smooth stone to clasp Haestan’s broad hand,
Jiriki stood up and edged past them, making his graceful way across the
chamber toward Simon.
   It was still difficult, Simon thought, to reconcile this confident, clever
being with the maddened creature he had found in the cotsman’s wire. Still,
when Jiriki turned his head a certain way, or flexed his long-jointed fingers,
it was possible to see again the wildness that had frightened and fascinated.
And whenever the firelight caught the prince’s gold-flecked amber eyes,
they shone ancient as jewels from the black soil of the forest.
   “Come, Seoman,” the Sitha said, “I will show you something.” He slid
his hand under the youth’s elbow and steered him toward the pool where
Khendraja’aro sat trailing his fingers in the water. As they passed the fire,
Simon saw that the wrist-wrestling contest was at full heat. The opponents
were locked in struggle, neither with an advantage yet, but Haestan’s
bearded face was clenched in a lock-toothed grin of strain. The slender
Sitha, by contrast, showed little effect from the standoff, except his gray-
clad arm quivering with the tension of their striving. Simon did not think
this boded well for Haestan’s chances. Sludig, watching the small frustrate
the large, sat open-mouthed.
   Jiriki fluted something to his uncle as they approached, but
Khendraja’aro did not respond: his ageless face seemed closed, shut like a
door. Simon followed the prince past him along the cavern wall. A moment
later, before his astonished eyes, Jiriki disappeared.
   He had only stepped into another tunnel, one that hooked around behind
the stone sluice of the little waterfall. Simon went in after him; the tunnel
curled upward in rough stone steps, lit by a row of lamps.
   “Follow me, please,” Jiriki said, and began to climb.
   It seemed they mounted far up into the hill, spiraling around and around
for some time. At last they passed the last lamp, and traveled a careful way
in near-darkness, until finally Simon became aware of the gleam of stars
before him. A moment later the passageway widened into a small cave, one
end of which was open to the night sky.
   He followed Jiriki to the cavern’s edge, which was a waist-high lip of
stone. The rock face of the hill dropped away below: ten bare cubits down
to the tops of the tall evergreens, fifty more to the snow-matted ground. The
night was clear, the stars shining fiercely against the blackness, and the
forest was all around, like a vast secret.
   After they had stood some while, Jiriki said: “I owe you a life, manchild.
Do not fear I will forget.”
   Simon said nothing, afraid to speak in case he should break the spell that
allowed him to stand in the very midst of the forest night, a spy in God’s
dark garden. An owl called.
    There passed another interval of silence, then the Sitha lightly touched
Simon’s arm and pointed out above the silent ocean of trees.
    “There. To the north, beneath Lu’yasa’s Staff . . .” He indicated a line of
three stars in the lowest part of the velvety sky. “Can you see the outline of
the mountains?”
    Simon stared. He thought there might be a faint luminescence on the
murky horizon, the barest hint of some great white shape so far away as to
seem out of reach of the same moonlight that glowed on trees and snow
beneath them. “I think so,” he said quietly.
    “That is where you go. The peak men call Urmsheim is in that range,
although you would need a clearer night to see it well.” He sighed. “Your
friend Binabik tonight spoke of lost Tumet’ai. Once it could be seen from
here, away there in the east,” he pointed into darkness, “from this very
perch, but that was in my great-grandfather’s day. In daylight the Seni
Anzi’in . . . the Tower of the Walking Dawn . . . would catch the rising sun
in its roofs of crystal and gold. They say it was like a beautiful torch
burning on the morning horizon . . .”
    He broke off, turning his eyes finally to Simon, the rest of his face
obscured by nightshadow.
    “Tumet’ai is long buried,” he said, and shrugged. “Nothing lasts, not
even the Sithi . . . not even time itself.”
    “How . . . how old are you?”
    Jiriki smiled, teeth glinting in the moonlight. “Older than you, Seoman.
Let us go down now. You have seen and survived many things today, and
no doubt you need sleep.”
    When they got back to the firelit cavern, the three guardsmen were
wrapped in their cloaks, snoring lustily. Binabik had returned, and sat
listening as several Sithi sang a slow, mournful song that droned like a
beehive and ran like a river, and seemed to fill the cave like the thick scent
of some rare, dying flower.
    Curled in his own cloak, watching the firelight flicker on the stones
above him, Simon was lulled to sleep by the strange music of Jiriki’s tribe.