
                        High King’s Hand




Simon awakened to find the cavern light changed. The fire still
burned, thin yellow flames among the white ashes, but the lamps had been
extinguished. Daylight filtered down through crevices in the ceiling that had
been invisible the night before, transforming the stone chamber into a
pillared hall of light and shadow.
   His three soldier companions still slept, tangled in their cloaks snoring,
sprawled like battle casualties. The cavern was otherwise empty but for
Binabik, who sat cross-legged before the fire tootling absently on his
walking-stick flute.
   Simon sat up groggily. “Where are the Sithi?”
   Binabik did not turn, but piped a few more notes. “Greetings, good
friend,” he said at last. “Was your sleep satisfying?”
   “I suppose,” Simon grunted, rolling back over to stare at the dust flecks
shimmering near the cavern’s roof. “Where did the Sithi go?”
   “Out for hunting, as it were. Come and raise yourself. I need your
assistance.”
   Simon groaned, but dragged himself up into a sitting position.
   “Hunting for giants?” he asked a short while later through a mouthful of
fruit. Haestan’s snores were becoming so loud that Binabik had put his flute
down in disgust.
   “Hunting whatever is threatening to their borders, I suppose.” The troll
stared at something before him on the stone cavern floor. “Kikkasut! This is
making no good sense. I am not liking it one least bit.”
   “What doesn’t make sense?” Simon lazily surveyed the rock chamber.
“Is this a Sithi house?”
   Binabik looked over, frowning. “I suppose it is good you have regained
your ability for the asking of many questions at once. No, this is not a Sithi
house, as such. It is, I am thinking, what Jiriki called it: a hunting lodge, a
place for their hunters to stay while roaming afield. As for your other
question, it is these bones that are nonsensical—or rather, too much sense
they make.”
   The knucklebones lay in a heap before Binabik’s knees. Simon looked
them over. “What does that mean?”
   “I will tell you. Perhaps it would be good your using this time to wash
the dirt and blood and juice of berries from your face.” The troll flashed a
sour yellow grin, pointing to the pool in the corner. “There is suitable for
washing.”
   He waited until Simon had ducked his head once in the bitingly cold
water.
   “Aaah!” the youth said, shivering. “Cold!”
   “You may be seeing,” Binabik resumed, unperturbed by Simon’s
complaints, “that I have been at throwing my bones this morning. What
they are saying is this: The Shadowed Path, Unwrapped Dart, and Black
Crevice. Much confusion and worry this is causing me.”
   “Why?” Simon splashed more water on his face and rubbed it off with
his jerkin sleeve, which was itself none too clean.
   “Because I was casting the bones before we left Naglimund,” Binabik
said crossly, “and the same figures I was getting! Exactly!”
   “But why should that be bad?” Something bright lying at the pool’s edge
caught his eye. He picked it up carefully, and discovered it was a round
looking glass set in a splendidly carved wooden frame. The rim of the dark
glass was etched with unfamiliar characters.
   “Bad it often is when things are always the same,” Binabik answered,
“but with the bones it is more than that. The bones to me are guides to
wisdom, yes?”
   “Mmm-hmmh.” Simon polished the mirror on his shirtfront.
   “Well, what if you were opening your Book of the Aedon to discover that
all its pages suddenly were having only one verse—the same verse, over
then over?”
    “Do you mean a Book I had already seen? That hadn’t been like that
before? I suppose it would be magic.”
    “Well, then,” Binabik said, mollified, “there you are seeing my problem.
There are hundreds of ways the bones can find themselves. To be the same
cast six times in running—I can only think it bad. Much as I have studied,
still I am not liking the word ‘magic’—but some force there is gripping the
bones, as a powerful wind is pushing all flags the same way . . . Simon? Are
you listening?”
    Staring fixedly at the mirror, Simon was astonished to find an unfamiliar
face looking back. The stranger had an elongated, large-boned face, blue-
shadowed eyes, and a growth of red-gold whiskers on chin, cheeks and
upper lip. Simon was further amazed to realize that—of course!—he was
only seeing himself, thinned and weathered by his travels, the first growth
of man’s beard darkening his jaws. What kind of face was this, he suddenly
wondered? He still had not a man’s features, worn and stern, but he fancied
that he had sloughed off some of his mooncalfishness. Nonetheless, he
found something disappointing in the long-chinned, shock-haired youth
who stared back at him.
    Is this what I looked like to Miriamele? Like a farmer’s son—a
ploughboy?
    And even as he thought of the princess, it seemed that he saw a flash of
her features in the glass, almost growing out of his own. For a dizzy instant
they were meshed together, like two cloudy souls in one body; an instant
later it was Miriamele alone whose face he saw—or Malachias, rather, for
her hair was short and black, and she wore boy’s clothes. A colorless sky
lay beyond her, spotted with dark thunderheads. There was another, too,
who stood just behind, a round-faced man in a gray hood. Simon had seen
him before, he was sure, so sure—who was he?
    “Simon!” Binabik’s voice splashed him like the cold pool-water, just as
the elusive name flitted within reach. Startled, he juggled the mirror for a
moment. When he clutched it tight again, no face was there but his own.
    “Are you turning sick?” the troll asked, worried by the slack, puzzled
expression Simon turned toward him.
    “No . . . I don’t think so . . .”
    “Then if you are washed, come to help me. We shall go to speaking of
the auguries later, when your attention is not so delicate.” Binabik stood,
dropping the knucklebones back into their leather sack.

                                    •••

   Binabik went first down the ice chute, warning Simon to keep his toes
pointed and his hands close to his head. The headlong seconds rushing
down the tunnel were like a dream of falling from a high place, and when
he thumped down into the soft snow beneath the tunnel mouth, bright, chill
daylight in his eyes, he was content to sit for a moment and enjoy the feel of
his heart’s rapid beating.
   A moment later he was bowled over by a surprising clout on the back,
followed by the smothering descent of a mountain of muscle and fur.
   “Qantaqa!” he heard Binabik shout, laughing. “If it is your friends who
are receiving such treatment, I am glad I am no enemy!”
   Simon pushed the wolf away, gasping, only to face a renewed, rough-
tongued assault on his face. At last, with Binabik’s aid, he rolled free.
Qantaqa sprang to her feet whining excitedly, circled the youth and troll
once, then sprang away into the snowy wood.
   “Now,” Binabik said, brushing snow from his black hair, “we must be
finding where the Sithi have been putting up our horses.”
   “Not far, Qanuc-man.”
   Simon jumped. He turned to see a line of Sithi file silently out of the
trees, Jiriki’s green-jacketed uncle at its head. “And why do you seek
them?”
   Binabik smiled. “Certainly not for escaping you, good Khendraja’aro.
Your hospitality is too lavish for us to hurry away from it. No, there are
certain things only I wish to make sure we still have, things I was obtaining
with some trouble at Naglimund that we will need on the roads ahead.”
   Khendraja’aro looked down on the troll expressionlessly for a moment,
then signaled to two of the other Sithi. “Sijandi, Ki’ushapo—show them.”
   The yellow-haired pair walked a few steps along the hillside, away from
the tunnel-mouth, then stopped, waiting for Simon and the troll to follow.
When Simon looked back he saw Khendraja’aro still watching, an
unreadable expression in his bright, narrowed eyes.
   They found the horses put up a few furlongs away, in a small cavern
hidden by a pair of snow-laden pine trees. The cave was snug and dry; all
six horses were contentedly chewing away at a pile of sweet-smelling hay.
   “Where did all this come from?” Simon asked, surprised.
   “We often bring our own horses,” Ki’ushapo replied, speaking the
Western tongue carefully. “Does it surprise you to find we have a stable for
them?”
   As Binabik rooted around in one of the saddlebags, Simon explored the
cavern, noting the light spilling through a crevice high in the wall, and a
stone trough filled with clean water. Propped against the far side was a pile
of helmets, axes and swords. Simon recognized one of the blades as his
own, from the armory of Naglimund.
   “These are ours, Binabik!” he said. “How did they get here?”
   Ki’ushapo spoke slowly, as though to a child. “We put them here after we
took them from you and your companions. Here they are safe and dry.”
   Simon looked at the Sitha suspiciously. “But I thought that you couldn’t
touch iron—that it was poison to you!” He stopped short, fearful that he had
ventured onto forbidden ground, but Ki’ushapo only exchanged a glance
with his silent companion before replying.
   “So, you have heard tales of the Days of Black Iron,” he said. “Yes, it
was once thus, but those of us who survived those days have learned much.
We know now what waters to drink, and from which certain springs, so that
we can handle mortal iron for a little time without harm. Why did you think
we allowed you to keep your coat of mail? But, of course, we have no
liking for it, and do not use it . . . or even touch it when there is no need.”
He looked over to Binabik, who was still rummaging intently in the
traveling bags. “We shall leave you to finish your search,” the Sitha said.
“You will find nothing missing—at least nothing you had when you came
into our hands.”
   Binabik looked up. “Of course,” he said. “I am only in worry over things
that may have been lost during the fighting of yesterday.”
   “Of course,” Ki’ushapo replied. He and the quiet Sijandi went out
beneath the branches of the entrance.
   “Ah!” Binabik said at last, holding up a sack that clinked like a purse full
of gold Imperators. “A worry eased, this is.” He dropped it back in the
saddle bag.
   “What is it?” Simon asked, irritated to be asking another question.
   Binabik grinned wickedly. “More Qanuc tricks, ones that will be found
very useful soon. Come, we should be returning. If the others wake up, stiff
with drink and alone, they may have fright and be doing something
foolish.”
   Qantaqa found them on their short journey back, her mouth and nose
daubed with the blood of some luckless animal. She bounded several times
around them, then stopped, hackles lifting as she sniffed at the air. She
lowered her head and sniffed again, then went loping ahead.
   Jiriki and An’nai had joined Khendraja’aro. The prince had shed his
white robe for a jacket of tan and blue. He held a tall bow, unstrung, and
wore a quiver full of brown-fletched arrows.
   Qantaqa circled the Sithi, growling and sniffing, but her tail waved in the
air behind her as though she greeted old acquaintances. She lunged forward
toward the blithe Fair Folk, then dodged back, rumbling deep in her throat
and shaking her head as though snapping the neck of a rabbit. When
Binabik and Simon joined the circle, she came forward long enough to
touch Binabik’s hand with her black nose, then danced away again and
resumed her nervous circling.
   “Did you find all your possessions in good order?” Jiriki asked.
   Binabik nodded. “Yes, with certainty. Thanks to you for seeing to our
horses.”
   Jiriki negligently waved his slender hand. “And what now to do?” he
asked.
   “I am thinking we should be on our road soon,” the troll responded,
shading his eyes to look at the gray-blue sky.
   “Surely not this day,” Jiriki said. “Rest this afternoon, and eat with us
again. We still have much to speak of, and you can leave tomorrow by dawn
light.”
   “You . . . and your uncle . . . show much kindness to us, Prince Jiriki.
And honor.” Binabik bowed.
   “We are not a kind race, Binbiniqegabenik, not as we once were, but we
are a courteous one. Come.”

                                    •••
   After a splendid lunch of bread, sweet milk, and a wonderfully odd,
tangy soup made from nuts and snowflowers, the long afternoon was spent
by Sithi and men alike in quiet talk and singing and long naps.
   Simon slept shallowly, and dreamed of Miriamele standing atop the
ocean as though it were a floor of uneven green marble, beckoning him to
come to her. In his dream he saw furious black clouds on the horizon, and
called out, trying to give warning. The princess did not hear over the
gathering wind, only smiled and beckoned. He knew he could not stand on
the waves, and dove in to swim toward her, but he felt the cold waters,
pulling him down, tugging him under. . . .

                                    •••

   When he fought free of the dream at last, it was to awaken in dying
afternoon. The pillars of light had dimmed, and leaned as though drunken.
Some of the Sitha were setting the crystal lamps in their wall niches, but
even watching the process gave Simon no better understanding of what lit
them: after being put in place they simply, slowly, began to glow with
gentle, suffusive light.
   Simon joined his companions at the stone circle around the fire. They
were alone: the Sithi, although hospitable and even friendly, nevertheless
seemed to prefer their own company, sitting in small knots around the
cavern.
   “Boy,” Haestan said, reaching up to clap his shoulder, “we feared ye’d
sleep all th’ day.”
   “I would sleep too, if I ate as much bread as he,” Sludig said, cleaning
his nails with a sliver of wood.
   “All here were agreeing on an early leave-taking tomorrow,” Binabik
said, and Grimmric and Haestan nodded. “There is no certainty this
mildness of weather will continue long, and it is far we must still go.”
   “Mild weather?” said Simon, frowning at the stiffness in his legs as he
sat down. “It’s snowing like mad.”
   Binabik chuckled deep in his throat. “Ho, friend Simon, talk to a snow-
dweller if you are wanting to know cold weather. This is like our Qanuc
spring, when we play naked in the snows of Mintahoq. When we are
reaching the mountains, then, I am sorry to say, you will be feeling real
coldness.”
   He doesn’t look very sorry at all, Simon thought. “So when do we start
out?”
   “First light in the east,” Sludig said. “The sooner,” he added significantly,
looking around the cavern at their unusual hosts, “the better.”
   Binabik eyed him, then turned back to Simon. “So we shall be at putting
things in order tonight.”
   Jiriki had appeared as though from thin air to join them at the fireside.
“Ah,” he said, “I wish to speak to you about just these matters.”
   “Surely there is no problem had with our leaving?” Binabik asked, his
cheerful expression not entirely masking a certain anxiousness. Haestan and
Grimmric looked worried, Sludig ever-so-faintly resentful.
   “I think not,” the Sitha replied. “But there are certain things I wish to
send with you.” He reached a long-fingered hand into his robe with a fluid
gesture, producing Simon’s White Arrow.
   “This is yours, Seoman,” he said.
   “What? But it . . . it belongs to you, Prince Jiriki.”
   The Sitha lifted his head for a moment, as though listening to some
distant call, then lowered his gaze once more. “No, Seoman, it is not mine
until I earn it back—a life for a life.” He held it up between his two hands,
like a length of string, so that the slanting light from above burnished the
minute and complicated designs along its length.
   “I know you cannot read these writings,” Jiriki said slowly, “but I will
tell you that they are Words of Making, scribed on the arrow by
Vindaomeyo the Fletcher himself—deep, deep in the past, before we of the
First People were torn apart into the Three Tribes. It is as much a part of my
family as if it were made with my own bone and sinew—and as much a part
of me. I did not give it lightly—few mortals have ever held a Staja Ame—
and I certainly could not take it back until I had paid the debt it signifies.”
So saying, he handed it to Simon, whose fingers trembled as they touched
the arrow’s smooth barrel.
   “I . . . I didn’t understand . . .” he stammered, feeling as if he were the
one suddenly under obligation. He shrugged, unable to say more.
   “So,” Jiriki said, turning to Binabik and the others. “My destiny, as you
mortals might have it, seems strangely bound with this manchild. You will
not then find it too surprising when I tell you what else I would send along
with you on your unusual and probably fruitless errand.”
  After a moment, Binabik asked “And what is that being, Prince?”
  Jiriki smiled, a feline, self-satisfied smile. “Myself,” he answered. “I will
go with you.”




   The young pikeman stood long seconds, unsure of whether to interrupt
the prince’s thoughts. Josua was staring out into the middle distance,
knuckles white as he clutched the parapet of Naglimund’s western wall.
   At last the prince seemed to notice the foreign presence. He turned,
revealing a face so unnaturally pale that the soldier took a half step back.
   “Y’r Highness . . . ?” he asked, finding it hard to look into Josua’s eyes.
The prince’s stare, the soldier thought, was like that of the wounded fox
he’d once seen the hounds take, and tear before it was dead.
   “Send me Deornoth,” the prince said, and forced himself to smile, which
the young soldier thought the most horrible thing of all. “And send me the
old man Jarnauga—the Rimmersman. Do you know him?”
   “I think so, Y’r Highness. With th’one-eyed father in book-room.”
   “Good man.” Josua’s face tilted toward the sky, watching the mass of
inky clouds as though they were a book of prophecy. The pikeman
hesitated, unsure of whether he was dismissed, then turned to sidle off.
   “You, man,” the prince said, stopping him in midstep.
   “Y’r Highness?”
   “What is your name?” He might have been asking the sky.
   “Ostrael, Highness . . . Ostrael Firsfram’s son, Lord . . . out Runchester.”
   The prince looked over briefly, then his gaze flicked back to the
darkening horizon as though irresistibly drawn. “When were you last home
in Runchester, my good man?”
   “Elysiamansa ’fore last, Prince Josua, but I send ’em half my gettin’s,
Lord.”
   The prince pulled his high collar closer, and nodded his head as though at
great wisdom. “Very well, then . . . Ostrael Firsfram’s son. Go and send
Deornoth and Jarnauga. Go now.”
   Long before this day the young pikeman had been told that the prince
was half-mad. As he clomped down the gatehouse stairs in his heavy boots,
he thought of Josua’s face, remembering with a shiver the bright, ecstatic
eyes of painted martyrs in his family’s Book of the Aedon—and not only
the singing martyrs, but also the weary sadness of Usires Himself, led in
chains to the Execution Tree.

                                   •••

   “And the scouts are certain, Highness?” Deornoth asked carefully. He did
not want to give offense, but he sensed a wildness in the prince today that
he did not understand.
   “God’s Tree, Deornoth, of course they are certain! You know them both
—dependable men. The High King is at the Greenwade Ford, less than ten
leagues away. He’ll be before the walls by tomorrow morning. With
considerable strength.”
   “So Leobardis is too slow.” Deornoth squinted his eyes, looking not
south where Elias’ armies crept inexorably nearer, but west, where
somewhere beyond the late-morning mist the Legions of the Kingfisher
were laboring across the Inniscrich and the southern Frostmarch.
   “Barring a miracle,” the prince said. “Go to, Deornoth. Tell Sir Eadgram
to hold all in readiness. I want every spear sharp, every bow tight-strung,
and not a drop of wine in the gatehouse . . . or in the gatekeepers.
Understood?”
   “Of course, Highness,” Deornoth nodded. He felt a quickening of his
breath, a slightly sickening thrill of anticipation in his stomach. By the
Merciful God, they would give the High King a taste of Naglimund honor
—he knew they would!
   Someone cleared his throat warningly. It was Jarnauga, scaling the stairs
up to the broad walkway as effortlessly as a man half his age. He wore one
of Strangyeard’s loose black robes, and had tucked the end of his long beard
under the belt.
   “I answer your summons, Prince Josua,” he said, stiffly courteous.
   “Thank you, Jarnauga,” Josua replied. “Go on, Deornoth. I will talk with
you at supper.”
   “Yes, Highness.” Deornoth bowed, helmet in hand, then was gone down
the stairway two steps at a time.
   Josua waited some moments after he was gone to speak.
   “Look there, old man, look,” he said at last, sweeping his arm out over
the clutter of Naglimund-town and the meadows and farmland beyond, the
greens and yellows dark-painted by the glowering sky. “The rats are coming
to gnaw at our walls. We will not see this untroubled view for a long time, if
ever.”
   “Elias’ approach is the talk of the castle, Josua.”
   “As it should be.” The prince, as if he had drunk his fill of the sights
before him, turned his back to the parapet and fixed the bright-eyed old man
with his own intent stare. “Did you see Isgrimnur off?”
   “Yes. He was not pleased to be leaving in secret, and before dawn.”
   “Well, what else could be done? After we put about the story of his
mission to Perdruin, it would have been difficult if anyone had seen him go
in priest’s robes—and as beardless as when he was a boy in Elvritshalla.”
The prince forced a grim, clench-jawed smile. “God knows, Jarnauga,
though I made sport of his disguising himself, it is a knife in my guts to
have pulled that good man from his family and sent him out to try and
recover my own failing.”
   “You are master here, Josua; sometimes being master means less of some
kinds of freedom than that given to the meanest serf.”
   The prince tucked his right arm into his cloak. “Did he take Kvalnir?”
   Jarnauga grinned. “Sheathed beneath his outer robe. May your God save
the one who tries to rob that fat old monk.”
   The prince’s tired smile widened for a moment. “Even God Himself
won’t be able to help them, in the mood Isgrimnur’s in.” The smile did not
outlast the moment. “Now, Jarnauga, walk with me here on the battlements.
I need your good eyes and wise words.”
   “I can indeed look farther than most, Josua—so my father taught me, and
my mother. That is why I am named “Iron-eyes” in our Rimmerspakk: I
was taught to see through veils of deception as black iron cuts spells. But as
to the other, I can promise no wisdom worthy of the name at this late hour.”
   The prince made a dismissive gesture. “You have helped us already, I
suspect, to see much we would not have. Tell me of this League of the
Scroll. Did they send you to Tungoldyr to spy on Stormspike?”
   The old man fell in at Josua’s side, his sleeves fluttering like black
pennants. “No, Prince, that is not the League’s way. My father, too, was a
Scrollbearer.” He lifted a golden chain out of the neck of his vestments,
showing Josua a carved quill and scroll that hung upon it. “He raised me to
take up his place, and I would have done no less to please him. The League
does not compel; it asks only that one does what one can do.”
   Josua walked silently, thinking. “If only a land could be so ruled,” he
said at last. “If only men would do what they should.” He turned his
thoughtful, gray-eyed stare to the old Rimmersman. “But things are not
always so easy—the wrong and right not always so apparent. Surely this
League of yours must have its high priest, or its prince? Was that
Morgenes?”
   Jarnauga quirked his lips. “There are indeed times when it would benefit
us to have a leader, a strong hand. Our woeful unpreparedness for these
events shows that.” Jarnauga shook his head. “And we would have granted
such leadership to Doctor Morgenes in an instant if he had asked—he was a
man of incredible wisdom, Josua; I hope that you appreciated him when
you knew him. But he would not have it. He wanted only to search, and to
read, and to ask questions. Still, thank whatever powers that we had him as
long as we did. His foresight is, at this moment, our only shield.”
   Josua stopped, leaning with his elbows on the parapet. “So this League of
yours has never had a leader?”
   “Not since King Eahlstan Fiskerne—your Saint Eahlstan—brought it
together . . .” He paused, remembering. “There almost was one, and within
my time. He was a young Hernystirman, another of Morgenes’ discoveries.
He had nearly Morgenes’ skill, although less caution, so that he studied
things Morgenes would not. He had ambitions, and argued that we should
make ourselves more of a force for good. He might have one day been the
leader you speak of, Josua: a man of great wisdom and strength. . . .”
   When the old man did not continue, Josua looked over to see Jarnauga’s
eyes fixed on the western horizon. “What happened?” the prince asked. “Is
he dead?”
   “No,” Jarnauga answered slowly, eyes still drawn out across the rolling
plain, “no, I do not think so. He . . . changed. Something frightened him, or
hurt him, or . . . or something. He left us long ago.”
   “So you do have failures,” Josua said, starting to walk again. The old
man did not follow.
   “Oh, certainly,” he said, lifting his hand as if to shade his brow, staring
out into the dim distance. “Pryrates was one of ours once, too.”
   Before the prince could reply to this he was interrupted.
   “Josua!” someone cried from the courtyard. The lines around the prince’s
mouth tightened.
   “Lady Vorzheva,” he said, turning to look down to where she stood
indignantly in a dress of gleaming red, hair aswirl in the wind like black
smoke. Towser skulked uncomfortably at her side. “What would you of
me?” the prince demanded. “You should be in the keep. As a matter of fact,
I order you to the keep.”
   “I have been there,” she called crossly. Lifting the hem of her dress she
angled toward the stairway, talking as she went. “And I will soon go back,
do you not worry. But first, I must one time more see the sun—or would
you rather keep me in a black cell?”
   Despite his exasperation, Josua was hard-pressed to keep his face
entirely stern. “Heaven knows that there are windows in the keep, Lady.”
He lowered his frown to Towser. “Can you not at least keep her off the
walls, Towser? Soon we are at siege.”
   The little man shrugged and limped up the stairs after Vorzheva.
   “Show me the armies of your terrible brother,” she said, a little breathless
as she reached the prince’s side.
   “If his armies were here, you would not be,” Josua said irritably. “There
is nothing to see, yet. Now please go down.”
   “Josua?” Jarnauga was still squinting into the cloudy west. “I think there
is perhaps something to see.”
   “What?!” In an instant, the prince was beside the old Rimmersman, his
body pitched awkwardly against the parapet as he strained to find what the
man saw. “Is it Elias? So soon? I see nothing!” He slapped his palm on the
stone in frustration.
   “I doubt it is the High King, coming from so westerly a direction,”
Jarnauga said. “Do not be surprised you do not see them. As I told you, I
was trained to look where others could not. Nevertheless, they are there:
many horses and men—too far away still to guess how many—coming
toward us. There.” He pointed.
   “Praise Usires!” Josua said, excited. “You must be right! It can only be
Leobardis!” He straightened up, suddenly full of life, even as his face
clouded with worry. “This is delicate,” he said, half to himself. “The
Nabbanai must not come too close, else they will be useless to us, caught
between Elias and the walls of Naglimund. Then we shall have to bring
them in, where they will be just more mouths to feed.” He strode for the
stairs. “If they stay too far, we will not be able to protect them when Elias
turns on them. We must send riders!” He went down the stairs at a bound,
shouting for Deornoth and Eadgram, the Lord Constable of Naglimund.
   “Oh, Towser,” Vorzheva said, her cheeks flushed with the wind and the
pace of events, “we shall be saved after all! Everything will be better.”
   “Just as well with me, my lady,” the jester responded. “I’ve been through
this all before with my master John, you know . . . and I’m not anxious to
do it again.”
   Soldiers were cursing and shouting now in the castle courtyard below.
Josua stood on the rim of the well, his slender sword in his hand, calling
instructions. The sound of metal on metal, as spear butts clanged on shields,
and helmets and swords were hurriedly taken from the corners where they
had been laid, rose past the walls like an invocation.




   Count Aspitis Preves exchanged a few terse words with Benigaris, then
pulled his horse up beside the duke’s, matching him stride for stride through
the high, dewy grass. The dawn sun was a shining smudge above the gray
horizon.
   “Young Aspitis!” Leobardis said heartily. “What news?” If he and his son
were to be on better terms, he must try to show kindness to Benigaris’
intimates—even to Aspitis, whom he considered one of the Prevan House’s
less impressive products.
   “The scouts have just rejoined us, my lord Duke.” The Count, a
handsome, slender youth, was quite pale. “We are less than five leagues
from the walls of Naglimund, my lord.”
   “Good! With luck we shall be there in early afternoon!”
    “But Elias is ahead of us.” Aspitis looked over to the duke’s son, who
shook his head and cursed beneath his breath.
    “He has already laid the siege in strength?” Leobardis asked, surprised.
“How? Has he learned to make his armies fly?”
    “Well, no, lord, it is not Elias,” Aspitis hurried to amend himself, “it is a
large force riding beneath the flag of the Boar and Spears—Earl Guthwulf
of Utanyeat’s banner. They have a half a league or so on us, and will keep
us from the gates.”
    The duke shook his head, relieved. “How many does Guthwulf have?”
    “Perhaps a hundred horse, my lord, but the High King cannot be too far
behind.”
    “Well, little should we care,” Leobardis said, reining up at the edge of
one of the many small streams that crisscrossed the meadowlands east of
Greenwade. “Let the High King’s Hand and his troop languish there. We are
more use to Josua at a short distance, where we can harry the besiegers, and
keep the lines of supply open.” With a splash he rode down into the ford.
Benigaris and the count spurred after him.
    “But father,” Benigaris said, catching up, “think now! Our scouts say
Guthwulf has moved ahead of the king’s army, and with only a hundred
knights.” Aspitis Preves nodded confirmation, and Benigaris drew his dark
brows together in a frown of earnestness. “We have thrice that, and if we
send fast riders ahead we can muster Josua’s forces, too. We could smash
Guthwulf against Naglimund’s walls as between hammer and anvil.” He
grinned, and clapped his father’s armored shoulder. “Think how that would
sit with King Elias—make him think twice, wouldn’t it?”
    Leobardis rode silently for a long minute. He looked back at the rippling
banners of his legions stretching back several furlongs across the meadows.
The sun had, for a moment, found a thinner spot in the overcast, bringing
color to the wind-bowed grass. It reminded him of the Lakelands east of his
palace.
    “Call the trumpeter,” he said, and Aspitis turned and shouted an order.
    “Héa! I’ll send riders ahead to Naglimund, father,” Benigaris said,
smiling almost with relief. The duke could see how much his son longed for
glory, but it would be Nabban’s glory, too.
    “Pick your fastest riders, my son,” he called as Benigaris rode back
through the lines. “For we shall move more swiftly than anyone dreams we
can!” He raised his voice to a great shout, turning heads all through the
field. “The legions shall ride! For Nabban and Mother Church! Let our
enemies beware!”
   Benigaris returned shortly to pronounce the messengers dispatched.
Duke Leobardis let the trumpets ring out, then sound again, and the great
army set out at speed. Their hoofbeats sounded, rolling like rapid drumbeats
in the meadow-dells as they passed out of the Inniscrich. The sun rose in the
muddy morning sky, and the banners streamed blue and gold. The
Kingfisher flew to Naglimund.




   Josua was still pulling on his unadorned, bright-polished helm as he went
through the gate at the head of two-score mounted knights. The harper
Sangfugol ran alongside, holding something up to him; the prince reined in
and slowed his horse to a walk.
   “What, man?” he asked impatiently, scanning the misty horizon.
   The harper struggled for breath. “It is . . . your father’s banner, Prince
Josua,” he said, passing it up. “Brought . . . out of the Hayholt. You carry no
standard but Naglimund’s gray Swan—what better one for yourself could
you wish?”
   The prince stared at the red and white pennant, half-unfolded in his lap.
The firedrake’s eye glared sternly, as if some interloper threatened the
sacred Tree about which it had enwrapped itself. Deornoth and Isorn, with a
few of the other knights nearby, smiled expectantly.
   “No,” said Josua, handing it back. His look was cold. “I am not my
father. And I am no king.”
   He turned, wrapping the reins around his right arm, and lifted his hand.
   “Forward!” he shouted. “We go to meet friends and allies!”
   He and his troop rode down through the sloping streets of the town. A
few flowers, thrown by well-wishers from atop the castle walls, fluttered
into the churned, muddy roadway behind them.
    “What do you see there, Rimmersman?” Towser demanded, frowning.
“Why are you mumbling so?”
    Josua’s small force was now only a colorful blur, fast disappearing in the
distance.
    “There is a troop of mounted men coming along the rim of the hills to the
south,” Jarnauga said. “It looks from here not a large army, but they are still
distant.” He closed his eyes for a moment as if trying to remember
something, then reopened them, staring into the distance.
    Towser reflexively made the sign of the Tree; the old Rimmersman’s
eyes were so bright and shone so fiercely, like lamps of sapphire!
    “A boar’s head on crossed spears,” Jarnauga hissed, “whose is it?”
    “Guthwulf,” Towser said, confused. The Rimmersman might have been
watching phantoms, for all the horizon revealed to the old jester. “Earl of
Utanyeat—the King’s Hand.” Farther down the wall the Lady Vorzheva
stared wistfully after the prince’s vanishing horsemen.
    “He comes from the south, then, ahead of Elias’ full army. It looks as
though Leobardis has seen him: the Nabbanai have turned toward the
southern hills, as though to engage him.”
    “How many . . . how many men?” Towser asked, feeling ever more
muddled. “How can you see such a thing, now? I see nothing, and my
sight’s the one thing that hasn’t . . .”
    “A hundred knights, perhaps fewer,” Jarnauga interrupted. “That’s what
is troubling: why are they so few . . . ?”




   “Merciful God! What is the duke up to?” Josua swore, rising in his
stirrups to gain better vantage. “He has turned east and is galloping full tilt
toward the southern hills! Has he lost his wits?!”
   “My lord, look!” Deornoth shouted across to him. “Look there, on the
skirts of Bullback Hill!”
   “By the love of the Aedon, it’s the king’s army! What is Leobardis
doing? Does he think to attack Elias unsupported?” Josua slapped his horses
neck and spurred forward.
   “It looks a small force only, Prince Josua,” called Deornoth. “An advance
party, perhaps.”
   “Why didn’t he send riders?” the prince asked plaintively. “Look, they
will try and push them toward Naglimund, to trap them against the wall.
Why in God’s name did Leobardis not send riders to me?!” He sighed and
turned to Isorn, who had pushed his father’s bear-helm back from his brow
to better scan the horizon. “Now we will have our mettle tested after all,
friend.”
   The inevitability of fighting seemed to have drawn serenity over Josua
like a mantle. His eyes were calm, and he wore an odd half-smile. Isorn
grinned over at Deornoth, who was loosening his shield from his saddle
pommel, then looked back to the prince.
   “Let them test it, Lord,” said the duke’s son.
   “Ride on!” the prince shouted. “The despoiler of Utanyeat is before us!
Ride!” So crying, he spurred his piebald charger into a gallop, making the
sod spurt beneath the horse’s hooves.
   “For Naglimund!” Deornoth shouted, lifting his sword high. “For
Naglimund and our prince!”




   “Guthwulf is standing fast!” Jarnauga said. “He holds on the hillside,
even as the Nabbanai come against him. Josua has turned to meet them.”
   “They are fighting?” Vorzheva asked, frightened. “What is happening to
the prince?”
   “He has not reached the battle—there!” Jarnauga was striding down the
wall toward the southwestern turret. “Guthwulf’s knights take the first
charge of the Nabbanai! It is all confusion!” He squinted and knuckled his
eyes.
   “What?! What?!” Towser put a finger in his mouth, staring and gnawing.
“Do not go silent on me, Rimmersman!”
   “It is hard to make out what happens from this far,” said Jarnauga,
unnecessarily, for neither of his two companions, nor anyone else on the
castle walls could see anything but a faint smear of movement in the
shadow of misty Bullback Hill. “The prince bears down on the fighting, and
Leobardis’ and Guthwulf’s knights are scattered along the hillslopes.
Now . . . now . . .” He trailed off, concentrating.
  “Ah!” said Towser in disgust, slapping his skinny thigh. “By Saint
Muirfath and the Archangel, this is worse than anything I can think of. I
might as well read this in . . . in a book! Damn you, man—speak!”




   Deornoth found it all unfolding before him as in a dream—the murky
shimmer of armor, the shouting and the muffled crash of blade on shield. As
the prince’s troop bore down on the combatants, he saw the faces of the
Nabbanai knights come slowly up, and the Erkynlanders’ too, an eddy of
surprise rippling out through the battle at their approach. For a timeless
instant he felt himself a fleck of shining foam, prisoned at the crest of a
hanging wave. A moment later, with a shocking roar and clash of arms, the
battle was all around them, as Josua’s knights came full against the flank of
Guthwulf’s Boar and Spears.
   Abruptly there was someone before him, a blank, helmeted face above
the rolling eyes and red mouth of a war-charger. Deornoth felt a blow to his
shoulder that rocked him in his saddle; the knight’s lance struck his shield
and slid away. He saw the man’s dark surcoat before him for an instant, and
swung his sword with both hands, feeling a shivering impact as it caromed
past the shield and struck the knight’s chest, toppling him from his steed
down into the mud and bloodied grass.
   For a moment he was clear; he looked around, trying to find Josua’s
banner, and felt a distant throb in his shoulder. The prince and Isorn
Isgrimnur’s son were fighting back to back in the midst of a swirling surge
of Guthwulf’s knights. Josua’s swift hand darted out, and Naidel pierced the
visor of one of the black-crested horsemen. The man’s hands flew to his
metal-clad face, covered in an instant with red, then he was yanked down
out of sight as his reinless horse reared.
   Deornoth saw Leobardis, the duke of Nabban, sitting his horse at the
farthest southeastern edge of the battle beneath his billowing kingfisher
flag. Two knights held their balking horses close by, and Deornoth guessed
the large one in the chasework armor to be his son, Benigaris. Damn the
man! Duke Leobardis was old, but what was Benigaris doing on the fringe
of things?! This was war!
   A shape loomed before him, and Deornoth spurred left to dodge a
downrushing battleaxe. The rider blew past, unturning, but was followed by
another. For a while all was swept from his head but the dance of stroke on
stroke as he traded blows with the Utanyeater; the clangor of the field
seemed to subside to a dull rush, like the sound of falling water. At last he
found an opening in the man’s guard and crashed a swordstroke against his
helm, crumpling it in at the visor-hinge. The knight toppled sideways and
off, his foot caught in the stirrup so that he hung like a butchered hog in a
pantry. His maddened horse dragged him away.
   Earl Guthwulf, black-mantled and black-helmeted, was now only a
stone’s throw away, dealing blows left and right with his great broad-sword,
holding off two blue-coated Nabbanai horsemen as if they were boys.
Deornoth leaned down in his saddle to spur toward him—what glory, to
trade blows with the Monster of Utanyeat!—when a toppling horse beside
him spun his own mount around.
   Pausing, still as muddled as if he dreamed, he found he had been driven
down the hill toward the outer edge of the battle. The blue and gold banner
of Leobardis was before him; the duke, white hair streaming from beneath
his helm, stood high in the stirrups shouting exhortations at his men, then
pulled his visor down over his bright eyes, preparing to spur forward into
the fray.
   The dream turned to nightmare as Deornoth watched. The one whom he
took for Benigaris, moving so slowly that Deornoth almost felt he could
reach out a hand and stop him, pulled back his long blade and carefully,
deliberately, pushed it into the back of the duke’s neck under the helm. In
the milling crowd, with the battle crashing all around them, it seemed that
no one but Deornoth saw this terrible act. Leobardis arched his back as the
blade was withdrawn, scarlet-streaked, and brought trembling, gauntleted
hands up to his throat, holding them there for a moment as if trying to speak
through some all-swaying grief. A moment later the duke sagged forward in
his saddle, leaning into his horse’s white neck and smearing the mane with
his unprisoned blood before rolling off his saddle to the ground.
   Benigaris looked down for a moment, as if contemplating a bird tumbled
from its nest, then tugged his horn to his lips. For a moment, with shouting
chaos on every side, Deornoth thought he saw a gleam in the black slot of
Benigaris’ helmet, as if the duke’s son caught his eye across the heads of all
the fighting men between them.
   The horn sounded, long and harsh, and many heads turned.
   “Tambana Leobardis eis!” Benigaris bellowed, his voice a dreadful
thing, ragged and sorrowful. “The Duke is down! My father is killed! Fall
back!”
   He sounded the horn again, and even as Deornoth stared in unbelieving
horror there came another horn call from the hillside above them. A line of
armored horsemen sprang out of the shadowed concealment of the trees.




   “Lights of the North!” Jarnauga groaned, sending Towser into another
paroxysm of frustration.
   “Tell us! How goes the battle!?”
   “I fear it is lost,” the Rimmersman said, his voice a hollow echo.
“Someone has fallen.”
   “Oh!” Vorzheva gasped, tears standing in her eyes. “Josua! It is not
Josua?!”
   “I cannot tell. I think it may be Leobardis. But now another force of men
comes down the hillside, out of the trees. Red-coated, on their banner . . . an
eagle?”
   “Falshire,” Towser groaned, and pulling off his belled hat flung it
clattering onto the stone. “Mother of God, it is Earl Fengbald! Oh, Usires
Aedon, save our prince! The whoreson bastards!”
   “They ride down on Josua like a hammer,” Jarnauga said. “And the
Nabbanai are confused, I think. They . . . they . . .”




  “Fall back!” Benigaris shouted, and Aspitis Preves at his side plucked the
banner from the stunned arms of Leobardis’ squire, riding the young man
down beneath his horse’s hooves.
  “They are too many!” Aspitis cried. “Retreat! The duke is dead!”
   Deornoth pulled his horse around and plunged back through the melee
toward Josua.
   “A trap!” he shouted. Fengbald’s knights were thundering down the
hillside, lances agleam. “It is a trap, Josua!”
   He cut his way through two of Guthwulf’s Boars who would have
blocked his path, taking hard blows on his shield and helm, running the
second man straight through the throat and almost losing his sword as it
stuck in the spine. He saw a rill of blood run past his visor, and did not
know if it was some other’s or his own.
   The prince was calling back his knights, Isorn’s horn blaring above the
screaming and clashing of arms.
   “Benigaris has killed the duke!” Deornoth cried. Josua looked up,
startled, as the blood-stained figure bore down on him. “Benigaris has
stabbed him in the back! We are trapped!”
   For a brief instant the prince hesitated, lifting his hand as though to raise
his visor and look around. Fengbald and his Eagles had pitched toward the
Naglimunders’ flank, trying to cut them off from their retreat.
   A moment later the prince raised his rein-wrapped shield arm. “Your
horn, Isorn!” he shouted. “We must cut our way out! Back! Back to
Naglimund! We are betrayed!”
   With a blast of the horn and a great cry of anger, the prince’s knights
surged forward, directly into Fengbald’s wide-strung crimson line.
Deornoth goaded his horse forward, trying to reach the front, and watched
as Josua’s whirling blade snaked through the guard of the first Eagle,
striking serpentlike beneath the man’s arm, in and out. A moment later
Deornoth found a host of red-surcoats before him. He swung his blade, and
cursed; although he did not know it, beneath his helm his cheeks were wet
with tears.
   Fengbald’s men, startled by the ferocity of their attackers, wheeled
slowly about, and in that instant the Naglimunders broke through. Behind
them the Nabbanai legions were in full retreat, flying brokenly back toward
the Inniscrich. Guthwulf did not pursue them, but rather sent his troops to
join Fengbald in pursuit of Josua’s fleeing knights.
   Deornoth hugged his charger’s neck. He could hear its breath rasping as
they galloped full out, back across the meadows and fallow farmland. The
sound of pursuit gradually fell away as the walls of Naglimund rose ahead.
   The gate was raised, a black, open mouth. Staring at it, his head
throbbing like a beaten drum. Deornoth suddenly wanted very much to be
swallowed—to go sliding down into deep, lightless oblivion, and never
come out again.