
                           The Green Tent




“No, Prince Josua. We cannot allow you to do such a foolish
thing.” Isorn sat down heavily, favoring his leg.
   “Cannot?” The prince lifted his gaze from the floor to the Rimmersman.
“Are you my keepers? Am I a child-regent or an idiot, that I should be told
what to do?”
   “My prince,” Deornoth said, resting a hand on Isorn’s knee to urge him
to silence, “you are master here, of course. Do we not follow you? Have we
not all sworn our allegiance?” Heads around the room nodded somberly.
“But you ask much of us, you must know that. After such treachery as has
been done to us, do you really think you can trust the king at all?”
   “I know him as none of you do,” Josua, as if burned by some inner fire,
leaped up from his chair and paced to his table. “He wants me dead,
certainly, but not this way. Not so dishonorably. If he swears safe conduct—
and if we avoid obvious stupidity—then I will return unharmed. He still
wants to act the High King, and the High King does not slay his brother
unarmed beneath a flag of truce.”
   “Then why did he throw you in th’cell you told of?” asked Ethelferth of
Tinsett, scowling. “Are you thinkin’ that’s proof of honor?”
   “No,” Josua replied, “but I don’t think that was Elias’ idea. I see no other
hand but Pryrates’ there—at least until after the deed was done. Elias has
become a monster—God help me, for he was my brother once in more than
blood—but he still has a queer sense of honor, I think.”
   Deornoth hissed air. “Such as he showed to Leobardis?”
   “The honor of a wolf, who slays the weak and flees the strong,” Isorn
sneered.
   “I think not.” Josua’s patient grimace was stretched tighter. “Benigaris’
patricide has the feeling of a grudge, to me. I suspect that Elias . . .”
   “Prince Josua, with your pardon . . .” Jarnauga interrupted, raising
eyebrows around the room. “Do you not think you are stretching to find
excuses for your brother? These are useful concerns that your liegemen
have. Just because Elias asks for parley does not mean you are bound to go
to him. No one will question your honor if you do not.”
   “Aedon save me, man, I care not a whit for what anyone thinks of my
honor!” the prince snapped. “I know my brother, and I know him in ways
none of you can understand—and don’t tell me he has changed, Jarnauga,”
he glared, forestalling the old man’s words, “for no one knows that better
than I do. But nevertheless I will go, and I need not explain any more. I
wish you all to leave me, now. I have other matters to think on.”
   Turning from the table, he waved them from the room.

                                    •••

   “Has he gone mad, Deornoth?” Isorn asked, his wide face heavy with
apprehension. “How can he walk into the king’s bloody hands this way?”
   “Stubbornness, Isorn—oh, who am I to say? Perhaps he does know what
he speaks of.” Deornoth shook his head. “Is that damned thing still there?”
   “The tent? Yes. Just out of bowshot from the walls—also well out of
range of Elias’ encampment, as well.”
   Deornoth walked slowly, allowing the young Rimmersman to set the
pace his wounded leg demanded. “God save us, Isorn, I have never seen
him like this, and I have served him since I was old enough to draw a
sword. It is as if he seeks to prove Gwythinn wrong, who called him
‘reluctant.’” Deornoth sighed. “Welladay, if there is no stopping him, we
must then do our best to protect him. The king’s herald said two guards, no
more?”
   “And for the king the same.”
   Deornoth nodded, thinking. “If this arm of mine,” he indicated the white
linen sling, “is movable by the day past tomorrow, then no force on earth
will keep me from being one of those guards.”
   “And I shall be the other,” Isorn said.
   “I think better you should be inside the walls with a score or so mounted
men. Let us speak to the Lord Constable Eadgram. If there is an ambush—if
even a sparrow is seen to fly from the king’s camp toward that tent—you
can be there in a few heartbeats.”
   Isorn nodded. “I suppose. Perhaps we can talk to the wise man Jarnauga,
ask him to give Josua some charm to protect him.”
   “What he needs, and it hurts me to say it, is a spell to protect him against
his own rashness.” Deornoth stepped over a large puddle. “Anyway, no
charm is proof against a dagger in the back.”




   Lluth’s lips were in constant, silent movement, as though offering an
endless series of explanations. His mumbling had slipped over into
soundlessness the day before; Maegwin cursed herself for not having taken
note of his last words, but she had been sure he would find voice again, as
he had many times before since his wounding. This time, she could sense,
he would not.
   The king’s eyes were closed, but his wax-pale face worked ceaselessly
through changing expressions of fear and sorrow. Touching his burning
forehead, feeling the muscles flexing weakly in the unfulfilled rhythms of
speech, she again felt as though she must cry, as though the tears welling
inside her, unshed, would eventually force their way out through her very
skin. But she had not wept since the night her father had led the army out
into the Inniscrich—not even when they had brought him back in a litter,
maddened by pain, the yards of cloth bandaging his stomach soggy with
dark blood. If she had not cried then, she never would again. Tears were for
children and idiots.
   A hand touched her shoulder. “Maegwin. Princess.” It was Eolair, his
clever face folded in grief as neatly as a summer robe stored for the winter.
“I must speak to you outside.”
   “Go away, Count,” she said, looking back to the rough bed of logs and
straw. “My father is dying.”
   “I share your grief, Lady.” His touch was heavier, like an animal nosing
blindly in the dark. “Believe me, I do. But the living must live, the gods
know, and your people have need of you this moment.” As if he felt his
words too cold, too proud, he gave her arm a brief squeeze and let go.
“Please. Lluth ubh-Llythinn would not want it any other way.”
   Maegwin bit back a bitter rejoinder. He was right, of course. She stood,
her knees aching from the stone cavern floor, and followed him past her
silent stepmother Inahwen, who sat at the foot of the bed staring at the
guttering torches on the wall.
   Look at us, Maegwin thought, wonderingly. It took the Hernystiri a
thousand, thousand years to crawl out of the caves into the sunlight. She
ducked her head to pass beneath the low spot of the cavern ceiling,
squinting her eyes against the gritty torchsmoke. And yet, it has taken less
than a month to drive us back in again. We are becoming animals. The gods
have turned their backs on us.
   She lifted her head up again as she emerged into daylight behind Eolair.
The clutter of the daytime camp was all around her; carefully-watched
children playing on the muddy ground, court women—many in the tatters
of their best clothing—on their knees preparing squirrel and hare for the
stew pot and grinding grain on flat stones. The trees growing close all
around on the rock-studded slope of the mountain bent grudgingly to the
wind.
   The men were nearly all gone; those not dead on the Inniscrich or having
their wounds tended in the honeycomb of caves were out hunting, or
guarding the lower slopes against any move by Skali’s army to finally crush
Hernystir’s battered resistance.
   All we have left are memories, she thought, looking down at her own
stained and ragged skirt, and the hiding holes of the Grianspog. We are
treed like a fox. When Elias the master comes to take the prey from his
hound Skali, we are finished.
   “What is it you want, Count Eolair?” she asked.
   “It is not what I am wanting, Maegwin,” he said, shaking his head. “It’s
Skali. Some of the sentries came back to say he’s been down at the bottom
of the Moir Brach all morning, shouting for your father.”
   “Let the pig shout,” Maegwin scowled. “Why doesn’t one of the men put
an arrow into his dirty hide?”
   “He’s not near in bowshot, princess. And he has half a hundred men with
him. No, I think we should go down and listen to him—from cover, of
course, out of sight.”
   “Of course,” she said scornfully. “Why should we care what Sharp-nose
has to say? Come to demand surrender again, I don’t doubt.”
   “Possibly.” Count Eolair lowered his eyes, thinking, and Maegwin felt a
rush of sorrow for him, that he should have to bear up under her ill will.
“But I think there is something else here, Lady. He has been there an hour
and more, the men say.”
   “Very well,” she said, wanting to get away from Lluth’s dark bed, and
hating herself for the wish. “Let me put on my shoes and I will come with
you.”

                                    •••

   It took the better part of an hour to climb down the forested mountain
side. The ground was wet and the air was chilly; Maegwin’s breath rushed
out in little clouds as she picked her way down the gullies after Eolair. The
gray cold had driven the birds out of the Circoille, or numbed them into
silence. No sound accompanied their passing but the shivering murmur of
wind-raked branches.
   Watching the Count of Nad Mullach making his nimble way through the
undergrowth, so like a child with his slender back and shiny tail of hair,
with his movements so quick and unthinking, Maegwin was again filled
with a dull, hopeless love for him. It seemed such a ridiculous way for her
to feel—tall, gawky child of a dying man—that it turned into a kind of
anger. When Eolair turned back to help her over a jutting stone, she
frowned as if he had offered her insult instead of his hand.
   The men huddled in the copse of trees overlooking the long ridge called
Moir Brach looked up in startlement at the approach of Eolair and
Maegwin, but quickly lowered their bows again and beckoned the pair
forward. Peering through the bracken down the finger of stone for which
the ridge was named, she saw a milling crowd of antlike shapes at the
bottom, some three furlongs away.
   “He just stopped speaking a moment ago,” one of the sentries whispered
—a young boy, eyes wide with nervousness. “He’ll start again, Princess,
you’ll see.”
   As if in planned confirmation, one of the figures strode out from the
throng of men in helmets and capes who surrounded a wagon and team of
horses. The figure raised his hands to his mouth and stood facing slightly to
the north of the watchers’ hiding-place.
   “. . . the last time . . .” his voice drifted up, muffled by distance. “I offer
you . . . hostages . . . return for . . .”
   Maegwin strained to make out the words. Information?
   “. . . about the wizard’s boy, and . . . princess.”
   Eolair snapped a glance over to Maegwin, who sat stock-still. What did
they want with her?
   “If you do not tell . . . where . . . princess is . . . we will . . . these
hostages.”
   The man who spoke—and Maegwin was sure in her heart it was Skali
himself, just from the wide-legged stance, and the sour, mocking tone that
even distance could not wholly obscure—waved an arm, and a struggling
figure in a rag of light blue was taken from the wagon and brought to where
he stood. Maegwin stared, feeling an ugly pressure on her heart. She was
sure that light blue dress belonged to Cifgha . . . little Cifgha, pretty and
stupid.
   “. . . If you do not tell us . . . you know . . . the princess Miriamele,
things . . . poorly for these . . .” Skali gestured and the kicking, thinly crying
girl—who might not really be Cifgha, Maegwin tried to tell herself—was
thrown back onto the wagon, amidst other pale captives, lying in a row on
the wagon bed like fingers.
   So, it was the princess Miriamele they sought, she marveled—the High
King’s daughter! Had she run away? Been stolen?
   “Can’t we do anything?” she whispered to Eolair. “And who is ‘the
wizard’s boy’?”
   The count shook his head roughly, frustration in every line of his face.
“What could we do, princess? Skali’d like nothing more than to have us
come down. He has ten times the men we have!”
   Long minutes passed in silence as Maegwin watched, fury tugging at her
emotions like a demanding child. She was thinking of what else to say to
Eolair and these others—how she’d tell them that if none of the men wanted
to go with her, she’d go down to the Taig herself and rescue Skali’s
captives . . . or, more likely, die bravely in the attempt—when the thickset
figure below, helmet off now, showing the tiny yellow smudge that was his
hair and beard, walked back out to the base of the Moir Brach.
   “Very well!” he roared. “. . . And Lokën curse . . . stiff backs! We . . . and
take these with . . .” The little figure pointed at the wagon. “But . . . leave
you a gift!” Something was untied from one of the horses, a dark bundle,
and dumped at Skali Sharp-nose’s feet. “Just in case . . . waiting for
help! . . . Little use against . . . Kaldskryke!”
   A moment later he mounted his horse, and with the harsh rasp of a horn
he and his Rimmersmen clattered off up the valley toward Hernysadharc,
the wagon bumping along behind them.

                                      •••

   They waited an hour before making their way cautiously down the bank,
moving as watchfully as a doe crossing a clearing. Reaching the bottom of
the Moir Brach, they scuttled to the black-wrapped bundle Skali had left
behind.
   When it was opened the men cried out in horror and wept, great racking
sobs of helpless grief . . . but Maegwin did not shed a tear, even when she
saw what Skali and his butchers had done to her brother Gwythinn before
he died. When Eolair put an arm around her shoulders to help her away
from the blood-soaked blanket she shook him off angrily, then turned and
slapped hard at his cheek. He did not protect himself, but only stared at her.
The tears that filled his eyes, she knew, were not from the blow—and in
that moment it made her hate him all the more.
   But her own eyes remained dry.




   Flakes of snow filled the air—confusing vision, weighting garments,
chilling fingers and ears to a painful tingle—but Jiriki and his three Sithi
companions seemed not to mind it much. As Simon and the others plodded
along on their horses, the Sithi walked jauntily ahead, often stopping to wait
for the riders to catch up, patient as well-fed cats, an indecipherable serenity
behind their luminous eyes. Walking all day from sunrise to twilight, Jiriki
and his fellows nevertheless seemed as lightfooted around the camp that
night as they had at dawn.
   Simon hesitantly approached An’nai while the others hunted deadwood
for the evening’s fire.
   “May I ask you some questions?” he asked.
   The Sitha lifted his imperturbable stare. “Ask.”
   “Why was Prince Jiriki’s uncle angry that he decided to come with us?
And why did he bring you three along?”
   An’nai brought a spidery hand up to his mouth as though to cover a
smile, although no smile had been present. A moment later he lowered it
again, revealing the same impassive expression.
   “What passes between the prince and S’hue Khendraja’aro is not mine to
hold, so I cannot share it, either.” He nodded once, gravely. “As to the other,
perhaps he can best answer it himself . . . yes, Jiriki?”
   Simon looked up, startled, to find the prince standing behind him, thin
lips taut in a smile.
   “Why did I bring these?” Jiriki asked, making a sweeping gesture from
An’nai to the other two Sithi, returning from a search around the thickly-
forested perimeter of the camping-place. “Ki’ushapo and Sijandi I brought
because someone must look after the horses.”
   “Look after the horses?”
   Jiriki raised an eyebrow, then snapped his fingers. “Troll,” he called over
his shoulder, “if this manchild is your student, then you are a poor teacher
indeed! Yes, Seoman, the horses—or did you expect to see them climb the
mountains beside you?”
   Simon was flummoxed. “But . . . climb? The horses? I didn’t think
about . . . I mean to say, couldn’t we just leave them. Let them go?” It did
not seem fair; he had never felt much more than a dangling tassel on his
journey—except, of course, for the White Arrow—and now the Sitha was
holding him accountable for the horses!
   “Let them go?” Jiriki’s voice was harsh, almost angry, but his face was
bland. “Leave them to perish, you mean? Once they have been ridden far
beyond where they would themselves go, we should free them to struggle
back across the snowy wastes or die?”
   Simon was about to protest, to point out that it wasn’t his responsibility,
but decided it was not worth arguing.
   “No,” he said instead. “No, we should not leave them alone to die.”
   “Beside,” Sludig said, walking by with an armload of wood, “how then
would we get back across the wastes ourselves?”
   “Exactly,” said Jiriki, his smile stretching; he was pleased. “So I bring
Ki’ushapo and Sijandi. They will tend the horses and prepare things for
my . . . for our return.” He brought the tips of his two index figures
together, as if to indicate some kind of completion. “Now, An’nai,” he
continued, “is a more complex matter. His reason for being here is more
like mine.” He looked down at the other Sitha.
   “Honor,” An’nai said, eyes downcast, staring at his own interlaced
fingers. “I bound the Hikka Staja—the Arrow-Bearer. I did not show proper
respect for a . . . sacred guest. Thus, I come to atone.”
   “A small debt,” Jiriki said softly, “when compared with my great one,
but An’nai will do what he must.”
   Simon wondered if An’nai had decided on his own, or if Jiriki had
somehow forced him to join them. It was hard to know anything about these
Sithi, how they thought, what they wanted. They were so damnably
different, so slow and so subtle!
   “Come now,” Binabik announced. A tiny streamer of flame wavered
before him, and he fanned it with his hands. “Now we are starting a fire,
and I am sure you will all be interested in a little food and wine, for the
warming of inner spaces.”

                                    •••

   In the next few days’ riding they left the northern Aldheorte behind,
coming down off the last decrement of the Wealdhelm hills onto the flat,
snow-swept waste.
   There was always cold, now, every long night, every dreary white day—
bitter, biting cold. The snow flew continuously into Simon’s face, stinging
his eyes, burning and cracking his lips. His face reddened painfully, as if he
had gone too long in the sun, and he could hardly hold the reins of his horse
for shivering. It was like being thrown out of doors forever, a punishment
that had gone on too long. Still, there was nothing he could do to remedy
the situation but offer silent prayers to Usires each day for the strength to
last until camp was made.
   At least, he reflected sadly, his ears stinging even beneath the hooded
cloak, at least Binabik is having a good time.
   The troll was, indeed, in his very element—riding ahead, urging his
companions on, laughing from time to time for sheer pleasure as he and
Qantaqa leaped along the mounting drifts. Long evenings around the fire,
while the other mortal companions shivered and oiled their sleet-saturated
gloves and boots. Binabik detailed the different types of snow, and the
various signals portending avalanches, all to prepare them for the mountains
that loomed implacably on the horizon before them, stern and judgmental as
gods in their crowns of white snow.
   Every day the great range before them seemed larger without ever
seeming a foot closer, no matter how far they rode. After a week in the
warmthless, featureless wastes, Simon began to long for the ill-rumored
Dimmerskog forest, or even the wind-lashed heights of the mountains
themselves—anything but this endless, bone-chilling plain of snow.

                                     •••

   They passed the ruins of Saint Skendi’s abbey on the sixth day. It was
nearly covered in snowdrifts: only the spire of the chapel protruded more
than a short distance above the surface, an iron Tree encircled by the coils
of some serpentine beast crowning its rotting roof. Rising up through the
frost-laden mist before them, it might have been a ship near-sunken in a sea
of purest white.
   “Whatever secrets it may be holding—whatever it knows of Colmund or
the sword Thorn—it is holding them too tightly for us,” Binabik said as
their horses trudged past the drowning abbey. Sludig made a Tree on his
forehead and heart, his eyes troubled, but the Sithi circled slowly, staring as
though they had never seen anything quite so interesting.

                                     •••

  As the travelers huddled around the campfire that night, Sludig
demanded to know why Jiriki and his comrades had spent so much time
examining the lost monastery.
   “Because,” the prince said, “we found it pleasing.”
   “What does that mean?” Sludig asked in irritated puzzlement, looking to
Haestan and Grimmric as if they might know what the Sitha meant.
   “It is better not to speak of these things, perhaps,” said An’nai, making a
flattening gesture with his spread fingers. “We are companions at this fire.”
   Jiriki looked solemnly into the fire for a moment, then his face split in an
odd, mischievous grin. Simon marveled; sometimes it was hard to think of
Jiriki as being any older than himself, so young and reckless did his
behavior occasionally seem. But Simon also remembered the cavern
overlooking the forest. Youth and great age mixed confusedly together; that
was what Jiriki was like.
   “We stare at things that interest us,” Jiriki said, “just as mortals do. It is
only the reasons that are different, and ours you would probably not
understand.” His wide smile seemed completely friendly, but now Simon
detected a discordant note, something out of place.
   “The question, northman,” Jiriki continued, “is why should our staring
offend you so?”
   For a moment silence descended over the fire circle as Sludig stared hard
at the Sithi prince. The flames popped and sputtered on the damp wood, and
the wind hooted, making the horses shift nervously.
   Sludig lowered his eyes. “You may look at what you please, of course,”
he said, smiling sadly; his blond beard was flecked with melting snow. “It is
only that it reminded me of Saegard—of the Skipphavven. It was as if you
mocked something dear to me.”
   “Skipphavven?” Haestan rumbled, sunk in his furs. “Never heard of’t.
Is’t a church?”
   “Boats . . .” Grimmric said, screwing up his narrow face in
remembrance. “There’s boats there.”
   Sludig nodded, face serious. “You would say Ship-haven. It is where the
longships of Rimmersgard lie.”
   “But Rimmersmen dunna’ sail!” Haestan was surprised. “In all Osten
Ard, no other race be so landbound!”
   “Ah, but we did.” Sludig’s face glowed with reflected firelight. “Before
we came across the sea—when we lived in Ijsgard, in the lost West—our
fathers burned men and buried ships. At least, that is what our tales say.”
   “Burned men . . . ?” Simon wondered.
   “The dead,” Sludig explained. “Our fathers built death-ships of new
ashwood and put the dead to flame on the water, sending their souls up with
the smoke. But our great longships, those that carried us on the world’s
oceans and rivers—the ships that were our lives as surely as a cotsman’s
acre or a shepherd’s flock—those we buried in the ground when they were
too old to be seaworthy, so that their souls would go into the trees, and
make them grow straight and tall to become new ships.”
   “But that was across th’ocean y’said—long ago,” Grimmric pointed out.
“Saegard is here is’t not? In Osten Ard?”
   The Sithi around the fire were silent and unmoving, watching intently as
Sludig answered.
   “It is. That is where the keel of Elvrit’s boat first touched land, and where
he said: ‘We have come across the black ocean to a new home.’”
   Sludig looked around the circle. “They buried the great longships there.
‘Never will we go back across that dragon-haunted sea,’ Elvrit said. All
along the valley floor of Saegard at the mountains’ feet lie the mounds of
the last ships. On the headland at the water’s edge, beneath the biggest
howe, they buried Elvrit’s ship Sotfengsel, leaving only its tall mast
thrusting up from the earth like a tree with no branches—it was that I saw in
my mind when I saw the abbey.”
   He shook his head, eyes bright with memories. “Mistletoe grows on
Sotfengsel’s mast. Every year, on the day of Elvrit’s death, the white berries
of the mistletoe are gathered by young maidens of Saegard, and taken to the
church . . .”
   Sludig trailed off. The fire hissed.
   “What you do not tell,” Jiriki said after a while, “is how your
Rimmersgard people came to this land only to drive others from it.”
   Simon breathed in sharply. He had sensed something like this beneath the
prince’s placid surface.
   Sludig replied with surprising mildness, perhaps still thinking of the
pious maidens of Saegard. “I cannot undo what my ancestors have done.”
   “There is truth to that,” Jiriki said, “but neither will we Zida’ya—we
Sithi—make the same mistake our kin made before us.” He turned his fierce
stare on Binabik, who met it solemnly. “Some things should be made clear
between us all, Binbiniqegabenik. I spoke only truth when I gave my
reasons for accompanying you: some interest that I have in where you go,
and a frail, unusual bond between the manchild and myself. Do not for a
moment believe that I share your fears or struggles. As far as I am
concerned, you and your High King may grind each other to dust.”
   “With respectfulness, Prince Jiriki,” Binabik said, “you are not
examining the full truth. If it was only the struggling of mortal kings and
princes that concerned us, we would all of us be defending Naglimund. You
know that we five, at least, are having other goals.”
   “Then know this,” Jiriki said stiffly. “Though the years that have passed
since we were sundered from the Hikeda’ya—those you call the Norns—
are as numerous as snowflakes, still we are one blood. How could we take
the side of upstart men against our kin? Why should we, when once we
walked together beneath the sun, coming out of the ultimate East? What
allegiance could we possibly owe to mortals, who have destroyed us as
eagerly as they destroy all else . . . even themselves?”
   None of the humans but Binabik could meet his cold gaze. Jiriki lifted a
long finger before him. “And the one you whisperingly call the Storm
King . . . he whose name was Ineluki . . .” He smiled bitterly as the
companions stirred and shivered. “Ah, even his name is fearsome! He was
the best of us once—beautiful to see, wise far beyond the understanding of
mortals, bright-burning as a flame!—if he is now a thing of dark horror,
cold and hateful, whose is the fault? If now, bodiless and vengeful, he
schemes to brush mankind from the face of his land like dust from a page—
why should we not rejoice? It was not Ineluki who drove us into exile, so
that we must hide among Aldheorte’s dark trees like deer, wary always of
discovery. We strode Osten Ard in the sunlight before men came, and the
works of our hands were beautiful beneath the stars. What have mortals
ever brought to us but suffering?!”
   No one could make reply, but in the stillness after Jiriki’s words a
plaintive, quiet sound arose. It hovered in the darkness, full of unknown
words, a melody of spectral beauty.
   When he had finished singing, An’nai looked to his silent prince and his
Sithi companions, then to those who faced them across the dancing flames.
   “It is a song of ours that mortals once sang,” he murmured. “The western
men loved it of old, and gave it words in their tongue. I will . . . I will try to
give it words in yours.”
   He looked up into the sky as he thought. The wind was slowing, and as
the snow flurries died the stars shone through, cold and remote.

       “Moss grows on the stones of Sení Ojhisá.”

  An’nai sang at last, the clicks and liquid vowels of Sithi speech muted.

              “The shadows are lingering, still as if listening
              The trees have embraced Da’ai Chikiza’s bright towers
              The shadows all whispering, dark on the leaves.

              Long grass is waving above Enki-e-Shao’saye
              The shadows are growing, upon the sward lengthening
              The grave of Nenais’u wears a mantle of flowers
              The shadowed brook silent, and no one there grieves.

              Where are they gone?
              Now the woods are all silence.
              Where are they gone?
              The song vanished away.
              Why will they come no more
              Dancing at twilight?
              Their lamps the stars’ messengers
              At ending of day . . .”

   As An’nai’s voice rose, caressing the mournful words, Simon felt a
longing such as he had never felt—a homesickness for a home he had never
known, a sense of loss over something that had never belonged to him. No
one spoke as An’nai sang. No one could have.

              “Sea beats above the dark streets of Jhiná-T’seneí
              The shadows are hiding, in deep grottoes slumbering
              Blue ice freezes Tumet’ai, entombs its sweet bowers
              The shadows have stained all the pattern Time weaves.

              Where are they gone?
               Now the woods are all silence.
               Where are they gone?
               The song vanished away.
               Why will they come no more
               Dancing at twilight?
               Their lamps the stars’ messengers
               At ending of day . . .”

  The song ended. The fire was a solitary bright spot in a wasteland of
shadows.




    The green tent stood by itself in the damp emptiness of the plain before
the walls of Naglimund. Its sides heaved and rippled in the wind, as though
it alone, of all the other things that might move unseen in that vastly open
place, was breathingly alive.
    Gritting his teeth against a superstitious shiver, although the dank,
knifelike wind was reason enough to let them go a-chattering, Deornoth
looked over to Josua, riding slightly ahead.
    Look at him, he thought. It’s as though he saw his brother already—just
as if his eyes could see right through the green silk and the black dragon
crest, right into Elias’ heart.
    Gazing back to the third and last member of their party, Deornoth felt his
heavy heart sink further. The young soldier whom Josua had insisted on
bringing—Ostrael, his name was—looked ready to faint from pure fright.
His blunt, square features, their sun-reddening faded now by the sunless
weeks of spring, were screwed tight in barely-suppressed terror.
    Th’Aedon save us if he’s got to be any use. Why on earth did Josua pick
him?
    As they slowly approached, the tent flap parted. Deornoth tensed, ready
to grab for his bow. He had an instant to curse himself for allowing his
prince to do such a foolish, foolish thing as this, but the green-cloaked
soldier who emerged only looked up at them incuriously, then stepped to
the side of the door, holding the flap open.
   Deornoth signed respectfully for Josua to wait and spurred his horse into
a quick circuit of the green tent. It was large, a dozen paces or more on each
side, and the guy ropes thrummed with the wind-buffeted weight of it, but
the flattened grass all around was empty of ambushers.
   “Very well, Ostrael,” he said, returning, “you will stand here, next to this
man,” he indicated the other soldier, “with at least one of your shoulders
visible in the doorway at all times, yes?”
   Taking the young pikeman’s sickly smile for an affirmative, Deornoth
turned to the king’s guard. The man’s bearded face was familiar; doubtless
he had seen him at the Hayholt. “If you, too, would stand near the doorway,
it would be better for all concerned.”
   The guard showed him a curled lip, but edged a step nearer the entrance.
   Josua had already dismounted and moved to the door, but Deornoth
stepped quickly through ahead of him with one hand resting lightly on his
sword hilt.
   “There is scarcely need for such caution, Deornoth,” a soft but
penetrating voice said, “that is your name, is it not? After all, we are all
gentlemen here.”
   Deornoth blinked as Josua stepped in behind him. It was bitingly cold
inside, and dark. The walls glowed faintly, letting in only a green fraction of
the light outside, as though the tent’s occupants floated inside a huge but
imperfectly-cut emerald.
   A pale face loomed before him, the black eyes pinpoint holes into
nothingness. Pryrates’ scarlet robe was rusty brown in the green murk, the
color of dried blood. “And Josua!” he said, horrible levity in his voice. “We
meet again. Who would ever have thought so many things would have
happened since our last conversation . . . ?”
   “Shut your mouth, priest—or whatever you are,” the prince snapped
back. There was such cold strength in his voice that even Pryrates blinked
in surprise, like a startled lizard. “Where is my brother?”
   “I am here, Josua,” a voice said, a deep, cracked whisper that seemed to
echo the wind.
   A figure sat in a high-backed chair in the corner of the tent, a low table
resting nearby, another chair before it—the only furniture in the huge,
shadowy tent. Josua moved closer. Deornoth pulled his cloak tighter, and
followed, more from an urge not to be left with Pryrates than any hurry to
see the king.
    The prince took the chair facing his brother. Elias, sat, strangely stiff, his
eyes bright as gems in his hawkish face, his black hair and pale brow bound
by the iron crown of the Hayholt. Propped between his legs was a sword,
scabbarded in black leather. The High King’s powerful hands rested on the
pommel, above the strange double hilt. Although he stared for a moment,
Deornoth’s eyes did not want to rest on the sword; it gave him a queasy,
unwell feeling, like glancing down from some great height. Instead he
looked back up to the king, but this was scarcely better: in the freezing cold
of the tent, the air so chill that a mist of breath hung before Deornoth’s own
eyes, Elias wore only a sleeveless jerkin, his white arms bare to his heavy
bracelets, the sinews pulsing beneath the skin as though they had a life of
their own.
    “So, brother,” the king said, baring his teeth in a smile, “you are looking
well.”
    “As you are not,” Josua said flatly, but Deornoth could see the worried
pinch of his eyes. Something was terribly wrong here; anyone could sense
it. “You called for the parley, Elias. What do you want?”
    The king narrowed his eyes, masking them in green shadow, and waited
a long while before he replied. “My daughter. I want my daughter. There is
another, too . . . a boy—but he is less important. No, it is Miriamele I
chiefly want. If you hand her over to me, I will give my word of safe
conduct to all children and womenfolk in Naglimund. Otherwise, all who
hide behind its walls and thwart me . . . will die.”
    He said this last with such casual lack of malice that Deornoth was
startled by the hungry look that flitted nakedly across his face.
    “I do not have her, Elias,” Josua replied slowly.
    “Where is she?”
    “I do not know.”
    “Liar!” The king’s voice was so full of anger that Deornoth almost drew
his sword, expecting Elias to leap from his chair. Instead, the king remained
nearly motionless, only gesturing for Pryrates to refill his goblet from a
ewer full of some black fluid.
    “Do not think me a bad host for not offering you any,” Elias said after he
had taken a long swallow; he smiled grimly. “I fear this liquor would not
agree with you.” He handed the cup to Pryrates, who took it gingerly
between his fingertips and lowered it to the table. “Now,” Elias resumed,
his tone almost reasonable, “can we not spare ourselves this useless by-
play? I want my daughter, and I will have her.” His tone turned grotesquely
plaintive. “Does not a father have a right to the daughter he loved and
raised?”
   Josua took a deep breath. “What rights you have are between you and
her. I do not have her, and I would not give her unwilling to you if I did.”
He continued hastily, before the king could respond. “Come, Elias, please—
you were my brother once, in all things. Our father loved us both, you more
than me, but he loved this land more. Can you not see what you are doing?
Not just with this struggle—Aedon knows this land has seen war a-plenty.
But there is something else here. Pryrates knows what I speak of. He it was
that guided your first steps down the path, I do not doubt!”
   Deornoth saw Pryrates turn, spewing a surprised cloud of breath at the
prince’s words.
   “Please, Elias,” Josua said, his stern face full of woe. “Turn back only
from the course you have chosen, send that cursed sword back to those
unholy ones who would poison you and Osten Ard . . . and I will lay my
life in your hands. I will open Naglimund’s gates to you as a maiden
unshuts her window for a lover! I will turn every stone in heaven and earth
to find Miriamele! Throw away the sword, Elias! Throw it away! Not by
accident was it named Sorrow!”
   The king stared at Josua as if stunned. Pryrates, muttering, rushed
forward, but Deornoth leaped and caught him. The priest squirmed beneath
his restraining arm like a snake, and his touch was horrible, but Deornoth
held fast.
   “Do not move!” he hissed in Pryrates’ ear. “Though you blast me with a
spell, still I will cut the life from you before I die!” He prodded the side of
the scarlet robe with his drawn dagger, just far enough to touch cloaked
flesh. “You have no place in this—neither do I! This is between brothers.”
   Pryrates became quiet. Josua was leaning forward, staring at the High
King. Elias looked on, as though he had trouble seeing what was before
him.
   “She is beautiful, my Miriamele,” he half-whispered. “In her I sometimes
see her mother Hylissa—poor, dead girl!” The king’s face, frozen a moment
before in malice, collapsed into confusion. “How could Josua have let it
happen? How could he? She was so young. . . .”
   Groping, his white hand reached out. Josua held his own out too late.
Instead of catching it, the king’s long, cold fingers alighted on the leather-
bound stump of the prince’s right wrist. His eyes flared into life, and his
face stiffened into a mask of rage.
   “Go to your hiding-hole, traitor!” he snarled as Josua snatched his arm
away. “Liar! Liar! I will shake it down around your ears!”
   Such hatred beat out from the king that Deornoth staggered back, letting
Pryrates wriggle free.
   “I will ruin you so completely,” Elias thundered, squirming in his chair
as Josua walked to the tent door, “that God All-powerful will search a
thousand years and never find even your soul!”

                                     •••

   The young soldier Ostrael was so terrified by the faces of Deornoth and
the prince that he wept silently all the wind-wracked way back to
Naglimund’s brooding walls.