
               Cold Fire and Grudging Stone




The dream gradually receded, melting like mist, a terrifying dream in
which he was surrounded by choking green sea. There was no up or down,
only sourceless light all around, and a host of slicing shadows, sharks, each
one with the lifeless black eyes of Pryrates.
   As the sea slid away, Deornoth broke surface, flailing up out of sleep into
bleary half-wakefulness. The walls of the guard barracks were spotted with
cold moonlight, and the steady breathing of the other men was like the wind
pushing through dry leaves.
   Even as his heart fluttered swiftly in his breast he felt sleep reaching out
again to reclaim his exhausted soul, soothing him with feathery fingers,
whispering voicelessly in his ear. He began to slide back, the tidal pull of
dream gentler than before. This time it carried him toward a brighter place,
a place of morning damp and gentle noontime sun: his father’s freeholding
in Hewenshire, where he had grown up working in the fields beside his
sisters and older brother. A part of him had not left the barracks—it was
before dawn, he knew, the ninth day of Yuven—but another part had fallen
back into the past. Again he smelled the musk of turned earth, and heard the
patient creaking of the plow traces and the measured chirp of cart wheels as
the ox pulled the wagon down the road toward market.
   The creaking became louder, even as the pungent, muddy smell of the
furrows began to fade. The plow was coming closer; the wain sounded to be
just behind. Were the ox-drivers asleep? Had someone let the oxen wander
trampling into the fields? He felt a childish horror.
   My Da’ll be right mad—was’t me? Was I s’posed to watch ’em? He knew
how his father would look, the puckered, rage-mottled face that would hear
no excuse, the face, young Deornoth had always thought, of God sending a
sinner down to Hell. Mother Elysia. Da’s goin’ t’ get th’ strop to me,
sure. . . .
   He sat upright on his pallet, breathing hard. His heart was stumbling as
badly as after the shark-dream, but it began to slow as he looked around the
barracks.
   How long have you been dead, Father? he wondered, wiping the swiftly-
cooling sweat from his forehead with his wrist. Why do you haunt me still?
Have not the years and prayers . . . ?
   Deornoth suddenly felt a cold finger of fear trace his spine. He was
awake now, was he not? Then why hadn’t the remorseless creaking noise
disappeared with his half-dream?
   He was on his feet in a moment, shouting, dead father’s ghost blown out
like a candle.
   “Up, men, up! To arms! The siege is begun!”
   Struggling into his mailcoat he went down the line of cots, kicking
wakefulness into the groggy and wine-addled, calling instructions to those
whom his first cry had brought suddenly to life. There were shouts of alarm
from the gatehouse above, and the ragged bleat of a trumpet.
   His helmet sat askew on his head, and his shield thumped his side as he
trotted out the door struggling with his sword belt. Poking his head into the
other barracks room he saw the denizens already up and swiftly arming
themselves.
   “Ho, Naglimunders!” he called, waving a fist while he held the belt
closed with the other. “Now the test, God love us, now the test!”
   He smiled at the ragged shout that answered him and headed for the
stairs, straightening his helmet.
   The top of the Greater Gatehouse, in the western curtain wall, looked
strangely misshapen by the light of the half-moon overhead: the hoardings
had been finished only days before, wooden walls and roof that would
protect the defenders from arrows. Already the top of the gatehouse was
swarming with partially-dressed guards, flitting forms weirdly banded by
the moonbeams that bled past the hoarding-walls.
    Torches bloomed along the wall as archers and pikemen took their
positions. Another trumpet squalled, like a rooster who had despaired of
dawn’s arrival, summoning more soldiers out to the courtyard below.
    The shrill protest of wooden wheels grew louder. Deornoth stared out
across the denuded, down-sloping plain before the town wall, looking for
the source of the noise—knowing what it would be, but still unprepared for
the actual sight.
    “God’s Bloody Tree!” he swore, and heard the man beside him repeat the
oath.
    Moving toward them as slowly as hobbled giants, taking form out of the
predawn shadows, were six great siege towers, their wooden summits fully
as high as Naglimund’s mighty curtain wall. Hung all over in dark hides,
they slouched forward like tree-tall, square-headed bears; the grunts and
cries of the hidden men who pushed them, and the screech of the wheels,
big as houses, seemed the voices of monsters unseen since the Eldest Days.
    Deornoth felt a not-unpleasant rush of fear. The King had come at last,
and now his army was at their door. By the Good God, people would sing of
this someday, whatever happened!
    “Save your arrows, fools!” he shouted, as a few of the defenders
launched wild shots into the darkness, the missiles falling far short of their
still-distant targets. “Wait, wait, wait! Soon enough they will be closer than
you’ll like!”
    Elias’s army, in response to the flowering of fire on Naglimund’s walls,
let their drums thunder out through the darkness, a great rolling rumble that
gradually resolved into a plodding two-part tread, as of titan footsteps. The
defenders blew horns from every tower—a faint and tinny sound against the
crash of the drums, but one that nonetheless betokened life and resistance.
    Deornoth felt a touch at his shoulder and looked up to see two armored
shapes beside him: bear-helmed Isorn, and glowering Einskaldir in a cap of
steel unadorned but for a metal beak that hooked down over the nose. The
dark-bearded Rimmersman’s eyes burned like the torchlight as he laid a
firm hand on his master Isgrimnur’s son, moving Isorn carefully but
forcibly out of the way so he could stride to the parapet. Staring out into the
dimness, Einskaldir growled doglike under his breath.
    “There,” he snarled, pointing to the bases of the siege towers, “at the big
bears’ feet. The stone-chuckers and the ram.” He indicated other large
engines moving in the wake of the towers. Several were catapults, long,
strong arms cocked back like the heads of startled snakes. Others seemed
merely hide-covered boxes, their workings hidden by their armor, designed
to come safely like hard-shelled crabs through the arrows and stones to the
wall, where they would perform whatever tasks they had been assigned.
   “Where is the prince?” Deornoth asked, unable to tear his eyes from the
crawling engines.
   “Coming,” Isorn replied, standing on his toes to try to look over
Einskaldir. “He has been with Jarnauga and the archive-master since you
returned from the parley. I hope they are preparing some wondrous device
to give us strength, or to sap the king’s. S’truth, Deornoth, look at them all.”
He pointed at the dark, swarming shapes of the king’s army, numerous as
ants behind the slow-rolling towers. “They are so damnably many.”
   “Aedon’s wounds,” Einskaldir snarled, and turned a red eye back on
Isorn. “Let them come. We will eat them and spit them out.”
   “There,” said Deornoth, and hoped he had made a smile come to his face,
as he intended. “With God, the prince, and Einskaldir, what have we to
fear?”

                                     •••

   The king’s army came onto the flatlands in the trail of siege engines,
swarming over the mist-soaked meadows like flies on a green appleskin.
Tents seemed to push up everywhere from the moist earth like angular
mushrooms.
   Dawn came quietly as the besiegers moved into place. The hidden sun
peeled away only a single layer of night’s darkness, leaving the world
suspended in directionless gray light.
   The great siege towers, which had stood in place for a long hour, like
dozing sentries, suddenly moved forward again. Soldiers dodged in and out
among the mighty wheels, heaving on the guy ropes as the massive engines
rolled laboriously uphill. At last they came within range; the archers on the
walls let fly, shouting with terrified joy when the arrows went hissing out,
as though they let go the tight tethers on their hearts with the bowstrings.
After the first wobbly barrage they began to find the range; many of the
king’s men dropped dead in their tracks, or lay wounded as the remorseless
wheels of their own engines ground them screaming into the turf. But for
every one who fell, arrow-pierced, another of the helmeted and blue-
jacketed engineers leaped forward to take up his guy rope. The siege towers
rumbled on toward the walls, undeterred.
   Now the king’s archers on the ground were close enough to return fire.
Arrows flickered back and forth between the walls and the earth below like
maddened bees. As the engines rattled and creaked toward the curtain wall
the sun broke through for a short moment; already the battlements were red-
sprinkled in places, as if with a gentle rain.

                                   •••

   “Deornoth!” The soldier’s white face, dirt-streaked, shone within his
helmet like a full moon. “Grimstede bids you come, and soon! They have
brought ladders against the wall below Dendinis’ Tower!”
   “S’Tree!” Deornoth clenched his teeth in frustration and turned to look
for Isorn. The Rimmersman had taken a bow from a wounded guardsman
and was helping to keep clear the last few ells of ground between the
nearest siege tower and the wall, skewering any soldier fool enough to
come out from the stalled tower’s protective skirts and try and take up the
loose guy ropes fluttering in the wind.
   “Isorn!” Deornoth shouted, “while we keep the towers at bay, they bring
ladders to the southwest wall!”
   “Go then!” Isgrimnur’s son did not look up from his arrow tip. “I will
join you when I may!”
   “But where is Einskaldir?!” From the corner of his eye he saw the
messenger jigging up and down in fearful impatience.
   “God knows!”
   Cursing again under his breath, Deornoth lowered his head and ran
clumsily along behind Sir Grimstede’s messenger. He gathered half a dozen
guardsmen as he went, tired men who had slumped down for a moment in
the lee of the battlement to catch their breath. Summoned, they shook their
heads regretfully, but donned their helms and followed; Deornoth was well-
trusted; many called him the Prince’s Right Hand.
   But Josua had poor luck with his first right hand, Deornoth thought
sourly as he hunched along the walkway, sweating despite the cold gray air.
I hope he keeps this one longer. And where is the prince, anyway? Of all
times he should be seen . . .
   Rounding the great bulk of Dendinis’ Tower, he was shocked to see Sir
Grimstede’s men falling back, and the swarming red-and-blue colors of
Baron Godwig’s Cellodshiremen pouring over the battlement onto the
curtain wall.
   “For Josua!” he shouted, leaping forward. The men behind him echoed
his cry. They came against the besiegers with a tinny crash of sword on
sword, and for a moment pushed the Shiremen back. One toppled from the
walls, shrieking, windmilling his arms as though the chill wind might bear
him up. Grimstede’s men took heart and pushed forward. While the enemy
was engaged again, Deornoth pulled a pike from the stiff grasp of a
sprawled corpse, suffering a hard blow to his body from a stray spear butt,
and pushed the first of the tall ladders away from the wall. A moment later
two of his guardsmen had joined him, and together they levered the ladder
out; it went shivering into open space as the besiegers on it clung and
cursed, their mouths gaping like black empty holes. For a moment it stood
free, halfway between earth and heaven and perpendicular to both; then the
ladder overbalanced backward toward the ground below, shedding soldiers
like fruit from a shaken branch.
   Soon all but a pair of the red-and-blue lay in their blood on the walkway.
The defenders pushed the remaining three ladders away, and Grimstede had
his men roll up one of the large stones they had not had time to move at the
assault’s beginning. They tipped it over the low spot on the wall so that it
went crashing down on the toppled ladders, splintering them like kindling
and killing one of the laddermen who sat where he had tumbled, staring
idiotically as the great stone rolled down upon him.
   One of the defending guardsmen—a bearded young fellow who had
diced with Deornoth once—lay dead, his neck broken by the edge of a
shield. Four of Sir Grimstede’s men had also fallen, crumpled like wind-
toppled scarecrows among seven men of Cellodshire who had also not
survived the failed assault.
   Deornoth was feeling the blow to his stomach, and stood panting as gap-
toothed Grimstede limped over to stand beside him, a ragged, bloody hole
in the calf of his boot.
   “’Tis seven here, an’ half-dozen more toombled off th’ ladder,” the
knight said, staring down with satisfaction on the writhing bodies and
wreckage below. “All down th’ wall it’s th’ same. Losin’ far more than we,
King Elias is, far more.”
   Deornoth felt ill, and his wounded shoulder throbbed as though a nail
had been driven into it.
   “The king has . . . far more than we do,” he replied. “ . . . He can . . . toss
them away like apple peelings.” Now he knew he would be sick, and moved
toward the edge of the wall.
   “Apple peelings . . .” he said again, and leaned over the parapet, too
pained to feel shame.




   “Read it again, please,” Jarnauga said quietly, staring at his knitted
fingers.
   Father Strangyeard looked up, his weary mouth open to form a question.
Instead, a bone-jarring thump from outside brought a look of panic to the
one-eyed priest’s face, and he quickly traced a Tree on the breast of his
black robe.
   “Stones!” he said, his voice shrill. “They are . . . they are throwing stones
over the wall! Shouldn’t we . . . isn’t there . . . ?”
   “The men fighting atop the walls are in danger too,” the old
Rimmersgarder said, his face stern. “We are here because we best serve
here. Our comrades search for one sword in the white north, against lethal
odds. Another is in the hands of our enemy already, even as he besieges our
walls. What little hope there is of discovering what happened to Fingil’s
blade Minneyar lies with us.” His expression softened as he regarded the
worried Strangyeard. “The few stones that reach the inner keep must come
over the high wall behind this room. We are at little risk. Now please, read
that passage again. There is something in it I cannot quite touch, but that
seems important.”
   The tall priest stared down at the page for some moments, and as the
room fell into silence a wave of cries and exhortations, muffled by distance,
stole through the window like a mist. Strangyeard’s mouth twitched.
  “Read,” suggested Jarnauga.
  The priest cleared his throat.

  “‘ . . . And so John went down into the tunnels beneath the Hayholt—
  steaming vents and sweating passageways alive with the breath of
  Shurakai. Unarmed but for a spear and shield, his very boot-leather
  smoking as he neared the firedrake’s den, he was, there is little doubt,
  as frightened as he ever would be in his long life . . .’”

   Strangyeard broke off. “What use is this, Jarnauga?” Something thudded
into the soil a short distance away with a sound like the fall of a giant’s
hammer. Strangyeard stoically ignored it. “Do . . . do you want me to go
on? Through all King John’s battle with the dragon?”
   “No.” Jarnauga waved a gnarled hand. “Go to the ending passage.” The
priest carefully turned a few leaves.

  “‘ . . . Thus it was that he came out again, into the light, beyond any
  hope of return. Those few who had remained at the cave mouth—this
  itself an indication of great bravery, for who could know what might
  happen at the door of an angered dragon’s tunnel?—swore great oaths
  of joy and astonishment; joy, when they saw John of Warinsten come
  up alive from the worm’s den, and astonishment at the massive claw,
  crimson-scaled and hook-taloned, that he bore upon his bloody
  shoulder. As they went shouting down the road before him, leading his
  horse triumphantly through the gates of Erchester, the people came
  gaping to their windows and into the streets. Some say that those who
  had loudest prophesied John’s horrible death, and the dire
  consequences to themselves of the young knight’s actions, were now
  most audible in their acclaim of his great deed. As word spread, the
  rows were quickly lined with clamoring citizens who threw flowers
  before John as he rode, Bright-Nail lifted high before him like a torch-
  flame, through the city that was now his own . . .’”

  Sighing, Strangyeard gently put the manuscript pages back into the cedar
box he had found to house them. “A lovely and frightening story, I would
say, Jarnauga, and Morgenes, hmmmm, yes, he puts thing wonderfully—but
what use to us?—no disrespect, you understand.”
   Jarnauga squinted at his own prominent knuckles, and frowned. “I do not
know. Something, there is something there. Doctor Morgenes, whether he
wished to or no, put something there. Sky and clouds and stones! I can
almost touch it! I feel blind!”
   Another wash of noise came through the window: loud, worried shouts
and the weighty chink of armor as a troop of guards jogged past in the
commons outside.
   “I do not think we have long to ponder, Jarnauga,” Strangyeard said
finally.
   “Nor do I,” said the old man, and rubbed his eyes.




   All through the afternoon the tide of King Elias’ army dashed itself
against Naglimund’s stony cliffs. The weak sunlight struck glinting shards
of reflection from polished metal as wave after wave of mailed and
helmeted soldiers swarmed up the ladders, only to be repelled by the
castle’s defenders. Here and there the king’s forces found a momentary
breach in the ring of stern men and grudging stone, but they were always
pushed back. Fat Ordmaer, baron of Utersall, held one such gap alone for
long minutes, battling hand to hand with the scaling-soldiers mounting the
ladders from below, slaying four of them and keeping the rest at bay until
help arrived, although he got his own deathwound in the fighting.
   It was Prince Josua himself who brought up a troop of guards, securing
the length of wall and destroying the ladder. Josua’s sword Naidel was a ray
of sunlight flickering through leaves, snicking swiftly in and out, making
dead men from living while his attackers swung clumsy broad-swords or
inadequate daggers.
   The prince cried when Ordmaer’s body was found. There had been no
love lost between the baron and himself, but Ordmaer’s death had been a
heroic one, and in the pulse of battle his fall suddenly seemed to Josua
representative of all the others—all the pikemen and archers and foot-
soldiers on both sides, dying in their own blood beneath cold, cloudy skies.
The prince ordered that the baron’s great, limp bulk be carried down to the
castle chapel. His guardsmen, cursing silently, complied.
   As the reddening sun crawled toward the western horizon, King Elias’
army seemed to sag, to let up: their attempts to push the siege engines
against the curtain wall in the hissing face of arrow-fire grew half-hearted,
and the scalers began to abandon their ladders at the first resistance from
the heights above. It was hard for Erkynlander to kill Erkynlander, even at
the High King’s command. It was harder still when those brother
Erkynlanders fought like denned badgers.
   As sunset came on a mournful horn blast floated across the field from the
lines of tents, and Elias’ forces began to fall back, dragging the wounded
and also many of the dead, leaving the hide-covered siege towers and
miner’s frames where they stood awaiting the next morning’s assault. As
the horn sounded again the drums beat loudly, as though to remind the
defenders that the king’s great army, like the green ocean, could send waves
forever. Eventually, the drums seemed to say, even the stubbornest stone
would crumble.

                                    •••

   The siege towers, standing like solitary obelisks before the walls, were
another obvious reminder of Elias’ intent to return. The damp hides hung
upon them permitted no mere flaming arrow to do damage, but Eadgram the
Lord Constable had been pondering all day. After seeking some advice
from Jarnauga and Strangyeard, he had at last devised a plan.
   Silently, even as the last of the king’s men limped down the slope toward
their encampment, Eadgram bade his men load oil-filled winesacks onto the
throwing arms of Naglimund’s two small slingstones. When the arms were
released, the oilsacks whistled across the open distance beyond the wall to
splatter over the towers’ leather mantling. This done, it was a simple matter
to send a few fiery pitch-tipped arrows streaking through the blue twilight;
within moments the four huge towers had become billowing torches.
   There was nothing the king’s men could do to quell the blaze. The
defenders on the walls clapped their hands together and stamped and
shouted, weary but heartened, as orange light danced on the battlements.
   When King Elias rode out from the camp, wrapped in his great black
cloak like a man of shadows, Naglimund’s defenders jeered. When he lifted
his strange gray sword, and shouted like a madman for rain to fall and
quench the fiery towers, they laughed uneasily. It was only after a while, as
the king rode back and forth, crow-black cape flapping in the cold wind,
that they began to understand from the horrible anger in Elias’ echoing
voice that he truly expected rain to come at his summoning, and that he was
outraged it had not. The laughter faded into a fearful silence. Naglimund’s
defenders, one by one, left off their celebrating and climbed down from the
walls to tend their wounds. The siege, after all, had barely begun. There was
no respite in view, and no rest this side of Heaven.




    “I’ve been having strange dreams again, Binabik.”
    Simon had ridden his horse up alongside Qantaqa, some yards ahead of
the rest of the company. It was clear but terribly cold, this their sixth day
riding across the White Waste.
    “Dreams of what sort?”
    Simon readjusted the mask the troll had made him, a strip of hide with a
slit cut in it, to mask the fierce glare of the snow. “Of Green Angel
Tower . . . or some tower. Last night I dreamed that it was running with
blood.”
    Binabik squinted behind his own mask, then pointed to a faint band of
gray running along the horizon at the base of the mountains. “That, I am
sure, is the edge of the Dimmerskog—or the Qilakitsoq, as my folk
properly name it: the Shadow-wood. We should be upon it with another day
or so.”
    Staring at the dreary strip, Simon felt his frustrations boiling up.
    “I don’t care about the damnable forest,” he snapped, “and I’m sick to
death of ice and snow, ice and snow! We shall freeze and die in this awful
wilderness! What about the dreams I’m having?!”
    The troll bobbed along for a moment as Qantaqa made her way over a
series of small drifts. Through the song of the wind Haestan could be heard
shouting something to someone.
    “I am already full of sorrow.” Binabik spoke measuredly, as if matching
his speech to the cadence of their progress. “Awake I lay two nights in
Naglimund, worrying what harm I would do in bringing you along for this
journey. I have no knowledge of what your dreams mean, and the only way
for finding it would be to walk the Road of Dreams.”
    “As we did at Geloë’s house?”
    “But I am having no faith in my unaided powers for that—not here, not
now. It is possible your dreams could give us aid, but still I do not find it
wise to walk the dream-road now. Here we are all, then, and this is what our
fate will be. I can only say I have been doing what seemed best.”
    Simon thought about this and grunted.
    Here we all are. Binabik is right; here we all are, too far in to turn back.
    “Is Inelu . . .” he made the sign of the Tree with fingers trembling from
more than chill, “. . . is the Storm King . . . the Devil?” he asked at last.
    Binabik frowned deeply.
    “The Devil? The Enemy of your God? Why are you asking that? You
have heard Jarnauga’s words—you know what Ineluki is.”
    “I suppose.” He shivered. “It’s just that . . . I see him in my dreams. I
think it’s him, anyway. Red eyes, that’s all I see, really, and everything else
black . . . like burned-up logs with the hot places still showing through.” He
felt ill just remembering.
    The troll shrugged, hands caught up in the wolf’s neck ruff. “He is not
your Devil, friend Simon. He is evil, though, or at least I am thinking that
the things he wants will be evil for the rest of us. That is evil enough.”
    “And . . . the dragon?” Simon said hesitantly a moment later. Binabik
turned his head sharply, presenting his strange, slitted gaze.
    “Dragon?”
    “The one who lives on the mountain. The one whose name I can’t say.”
    Binabik laughed explosively, his breath a cloud. “Igjarjuk is its name!
Daughter of the Mountains, you are having many worries, young friend!
Devils! Dragons!” He caught one of his own tears on the finger of his glove
and held it up. “Look!” he chuckled. “As if there was need of making more
ice.”
    “But there was a dragon!” Simon answered hotly. “Everyone said so!”
    “Long ago, Simon. It is an ill-omened place, but that is being as much for
its isolation as anything else, is my guessing. Qanuc legends tell a great ice-
worm lived there once, and my people do not go there, but now I think it to
be more likely a haunt of snow leopards and such creatures. Not that there
will not be things of danger. The Hunën, as we are well-knowing, range far
afield these days.”
   “So then, truly I have little to fear? The most terrible things have been
running through my head at night.”
   “I was not saying you had little to fear, Simon. We must never be
forgetting that we have enemies; some, it would seem, are very powerful
indeed.”

                                     •••

   Another frigid night in the Waste; another campfire in the dark emptiness
of the surrounding snowfields. Simon would have liked nothing better in
the entire world than to be curled up in a bed at Naglimund, covered in
blankets, even if the bloodiest battle in the history of Osten Ard raged just
outside his door. He was sure that if just now someone offered him a warm,
dry place to sleep, he would lie or kill or take Usires’ name in vain to get it.
He was positive, as he sat wrapped in his saddle blanket trying to keep his
teeth from chattering, that he could feel his very eyelashes freezing on his
lids.
   Wolves were yipping and wailing in the unending darkness beyond the
faint firelight, carrying on long and mournfully intricate conversations. Two
nights before, when the companions had first begun to hear their singing,
Qantaqa spent the entire evening pacing nervously around the campfire
circle. She had since grown used to the night cries of her fellows, and only
responded with an occasional uneasy whimper.
   “Why dunna she talk b-b-back at ’em?” Haestan asked worriedly. A
plainsman of the Erkynlandish north, he had no more love for wolves than
did Sludig, although he had grown almost fond of Binabik’s mount. “Why
dunna she tell ’em t’go p-plague someone else?”
   “Like men, not all tribes of Qantaqa’s kind are at peace,” Binabik
replied, setting no one’s mind at ease.
   Tonight the great she-wolf was doing her stalwart best to ignore the
howling—pretending sleep, but giving herself away as her pricked ears
swiveled toward the louder cries. The wolfsong, Simon decided as he
huddled deeper in his blanket, was about the loneliest sound he had ever
heard.
   Why am I here? he wondered. Why are any of us here? Searching
through this horrible snow for some sword no one has even thought about
in years. Meanwhile, the Princess and all the rest of them are back at the
castle waiting for the king to attack! Stupid! Binabik grew up in the
mountains, in the snow—Grimmric and Haestan and Sludig are soldiers—
the Aedon alone knows what the Sithi want. So why am I here? It’s stupid!
   The howling quieted. A long forefinger touched Simon’s hand, making
him jump.
   “Do you listen to the wolves, Seoman?” Jiriki asked.
   “It’s hard n-not to.”
   “They sing such fierce songs.” The Sitha shook his head. “They are like
your mortal kind. They sing of where they have been, and what they have
seen and scented. They tell each other where the elk are running, and who
has taken whom to mate, but mostly they are merely crying ‘I am! Here I
am!’” Jiriki smiled, veiling his eyes as he watched the dying fire.
   “And th-that’s what you think we . . . we m-m-mortals are saying?”
   “With words and without them,” the prince responded. “You must try to
see things with our eyes: to the Zida’ya, your folk often seem as children.
You see that the long-lived Sithi do not sleep, that we stay awake
throughout the long night of history. You men, like children, wish to remain
at the fire with your elders, to hear the songs and stories and watch the
dancing.” He gestured around, as though the darkness was peopled with
invisible revelers.
   “But you cannot, Simon,” he continued kindly. “You may not. It is given
to your folk to sleep the final sleep, just as it is given to our kind to walk
and sing beneath the stars the night long. Perhaps there is even a richness in
your sleeping dreams that we Zida’ya do not understand.”
   The stars hanging in the black-crystal sky seemed to slide away, to sink
deeper into the vast night. Simon thought of the Sithi, and of a life that did
not end, and could not make himself understand what it might be like.
Chilled to the bone—even, it seemed, to his soul—he leaned close to the
fire, pulling off his damp mittens to warm his hands.
   “But the Sithi can d-die, c-c-can’t they?” he asked cautiously, cursing his
frozen stuttering speech.
   Jiriki leaned close, his eyes narrowing, and for a frightening moment
Simon thought the Sitha was going to strike him for his temerity. Instead,
Jiriki took Simon’s trembling hand and tilted it.
   “Your ring,” he said, staring at the fish-shaped curlicue, “I had not seen it
before. Who gave you this?”
   “My . . . my master, I su . . . suppose he was,” Simon stammered.
“Doctor Morgenes of the Hayholt. He sent it after me, to B-B-Binabik.”
The cool, strong clutch of the Sithi prince’s hand was unsettling, but he
dared not pull away.
   “So you are one of your kind who knows the Secret?” Jiriki asked,
watching him intently. The depth of his golden eyes, rust-tinged by the
fire’s reflection, was frightening.
   “S-Secret? N-N-No! No, I don’t know any secret!”
   Jiriki stared at him for a moment, holding him still with his eyes as
surely as if he had grasped Simon’s head in both hands.
   “Then why should he give you the ring?” Jiriki asked, mostly to himself,
shaking his head as he released Simon’s hand. “And I myself gave you a
White Arrow! The Ancestors have made for us a strange road indeed.” He
turned back to stare at the wavering fire, and would not answer Simon’s
questions.
   Secrets, Simon thought angrily, more secrets! Binabik has them.
Morgenes had them, the Sithi are full of them! I don’t want to know about
any other secrets! Why have I been picked out for this punishment? Why is
everyone forever forcing their horrible secrets on me?!
   He cried silently for a while, hugging his knees and shivering, wishing
for impossible things.

                                     •••

   They reached the eastern outskirts of the Dimmerskog on the afternoon
of the next day. Although the forest was covered in a thick blanket of white
snow, it nevertheless seemed, as Binabik had named it, a place of shadows.
The company did not pass beneath its eaves, and might have chosen not to
even had their path lain that way, so thick with foreboding was the wood’s
atmosphere. The trees, despite their size—and some of them were huge
indeed—seemed dwarfish and twisted, as though they squirmed bitterly
beneath their burden of needled branches and snow. The open spaces
between the contorted trunks seemed to bend away crazily like tunnels dug
by some huge and drunken mole, leading at last to dangerous, secretive
depths.
   Passing in near silence, his horse’s hooves crunching softly in the snow,
Simon imagined following the gaping pathways into the bark-pillared,
white-roofed halls of Dimmerskog, coming at last to—who could guess?
Perhaps to the dark, malicious heart of the forest, a place where the trees
breathed together and passed endless rumors with the scaly rub of branch
on branch, or the malicious exhalation of wind through twigs and frozen
leaves.
   They camped that night in the open again, even though the Dimmerskog
crouched only a short distance away like a sleeping animal. None of them
wanted to spend a night beneath the forest’s branches—especially Sludig,
who had been raised on stories of the ghastly things that stalked the wood’s
pale corridors. The Sithi did not seem to care, but Jiriki spent part of the
evening oiling his dark witchwood sword. Again the company huddled
around a naked fire, and the east wind razored past them all the long
evening, sending great powdery spouts of snow whirling all around, and
sporting among the Dimmerskog’s upper reaches. When they lay down that
night to sleep it was to the sound of the forest creaking, and the wind-ridden
branches sawing one against the other.

                                    •••

   Two more days of slow riding brought them around the forest and across
the last stretch of open, icy land to the foothills of the mountains. The
landscape was bleak, and the daylight glared off the snowcrust until
Simon’s head throbbed from squinting, but the weather seemed a little
warmer. The snow still fell, but the harrying wind did not drive past cloak
and coat as it did out of the mountains’ broad lee.
   “Look!” Sludig cried, pointing away up the sloping apron of the
foothills.
   At first Simon saw nothing but the ubiquitous snowcapped rocks and
trees. Then, as his eye slid along the line of low hills to the east, he saw
movement. Two strangely-shaped figures—or was it four, oddly
commingled?—were silhouetted on the ridgetop a furlong away.
   “Wolves?” he asked nervously.
   Binabik rode Qantaqa out from the party until they stood clear, then
cupped his gloved hands in his mouth. “Yah aqonik mij-ayah nu tutusiq,
henimaatuq?” he called. His words echoed briefly and then died amid the
shrouded hills. “In truth there should be no shouting,” he whispered to a
puzzled Simon. “Higher up it might be the causing of snowslides.”
   “But who are you . . . ?”
   “Sshhh.” Binabik waved his hand. A moment later the two shapes moved
down the ridge a short way toward the companions. Now Simon could see
that the pair were small men, each astride a shaggy, twist-horned ram.
Trolls!
   One of them called out. Binabik, after listening intently, turned with a
smile to his comrades.
   “They wish for knowing where we go, and if that is not being a flesh-
eating Rimmersman in our midst, and is he a prisoner?”
   “The devil take them!” Sludig growled. Binabik’s smile widened, and he
turned back to the ridge.
   “Binbiniqegabenik ea sikka!” he shouted. “Uc sikkan mo-hinaq da
Yijarjuk!”
   The two round fur-hooded heads regarded them blankly for a moment,
like sunbaffled owls. A moment later one rapped his chest with his hand,
and the other waved his mittened arm in a wide circle as they turned their
mounts and rode off up the ridge in a cloud of powdery snow.
   “What was all that?” Sludig asked, nettled.
   Binabik’s grin seemed strained. “I told them we were to go to
Urmsheim,” he explained. “One gave the sign to ward off evil, the other
was using a charm against madmen.”

                                    •••

   After making their way up into the hills, the company made camp in a
rocky dale gouged into the hem of Urmsheim’s mantle.
   “Here it is we should leave the horses, and those things we need not be
carrying,” Binabik said as he surveyed the sheltered site.
   Jiriki strode to the mouth of the dale and leaned backward, staring up
toward Urmsheim’s craggy, snowcapped head, pink-tinged on its westerly
face by the setting sun. The wind billowed his cloak and blew his hair up
around his face like wisps of lavender clouds.
   “It has been long since I have seen this place,” he said.
   “Have you climbed this mountain before?” Simon asked, struggling with
his horse’s cinch buckle.
   “I have never seen the peak’s far side,” the Sitha answered. “This will be
something new for me—to see the easternmost realm of the Hikeda’ya.”
   “The Norns?”
   “Everything north of the mountains was ceded to them long ago, at the
time of the Parting.” Jiriki strode back up the gulley. “Ki’ushapo, you and
Sijandi must prepare a shelter for the horses. See, there is some scrub
growing here, under the leaning rocks, that may be a boon if you run short
of hay.” He lapsed over into the Sithi tongue, and An’nai and the other two
began to set up a campsite more permanent than any the company had
enjoyed since leaving the hunting lodge.
   “Here, Simon, see what I have brought!” Binabik called.
   The youth made his way past the three soldiers, who were splitting the
small trees they had felled into firewood. The troll was squatting on the
ground pulling oilskin-wrapped bundles from his saddlebag.
   “The blacksmith at Naglimund thought me as mad as I am small,”
Binabik smiled as Simon approached, “but he made for me the things I was
wanting.”
   Unlaced, the pouches disgorged all kinds of strange objects—spike-
covered metal plates with straps and buckles, odd hammers with pointy
heads, and harnesses that looked as though they might be made to fit very
small horses.
   “What are all these things?”
   “For the wooing and winning of mountains,” Binabik smirked. “Even the
Qanuc, with all our nimblefootedness, do not go climbing to the highest
reaches unprepared. See, these are for wearing on boots,” he indicated the
spiked plates, “and these are ice-axes—very useful they are. Sludig will
have seen them, no doubt.”
   “And the harnesses?”
   “So we may be roping ourselves together. Thus, if the sleet is blowing, or
we are on dragon-snow or too-thin ice, when one falls the others can then
be bearing up his weight. If there had been the time, I would have made
preparation of a harness for Qantaqa, too. She will be upset at staying
behind, and we will have a sad parting.” The troll hummed a quiet tune as
he oiled and polished.
   Simon stared silently at Binabik’s tools. Somehow he had thought
climbing the mountain would be something like climbing the stairs of
Green Angel Tower—steeply uphill, but essentially no more than a difficult
hike. This talk of people falling, and thin ice . . .
   “Ho, Simon-lad!” It was Grimmric. “Come make y’rself useful. Pick up
some of th’ chippings. We’ll have one last good blaze ’fore we go t’killing
ourselves up-mountain.”

                                     •••

  The white tower again loomed in his dreams that night. He clung
desperately to its blood-slickened sides as wolves howled below him, and a
dark, red-eyed shape rang the baleful bells above.




   The innkeeper looked up, mouth open to speak, then stopped. He blinked
and swallowed, like a frog.
   The stranger was a monk, robed and hooded in black, his garb spattered
in places with the mud of the road. What was arresting was his size: he was
fairly tall but broad as an ale barrel, wide enough that the tavern room—not
the brightest to begin with—had perceptibly darkened when he pushed
through the doorway.
   “I . . . I’m sorry, Father.” The innkeeper smiled ingratiatingly. Here was a
man of the Aedonite God who looked as though he could squeeze the sin
right out of you if he chose. “What were you asking?”
   “I said I’ve been to every inn on every street in the wharf district, and
I’ve had no luck. My back aches. Give me a mug of your best.” He stumped
over to a table and lowered his bulk onto a creaking bench. “This damnable
Abaingeat has more inns than it has roads.” His accent, the innkeeper noted,
was a Rimmersman’s. That explained the raw, pink look of his face: the
innkeeper had heard it said that the men of Rimmersgard had such thick
beards they had to shave thrice daily—those few who didn’t just let them
grow.
   “We are a harbor town, Father,” he said, setting a healthy flagon down
before the scowling, rumpled monk. “And with the things that are going on
these days—” he shrugged and made a face, “well, there are plenty of
strangers wanting rooms.”
   The monk wiped foam from his upper lip and frowned. “I know. A
damnable shame. Poor Lluth . . .”
   The innkeeper looked around nervously, but the Erkynlandish guardsmen
in the corner were paying no attention. “You said you have had no luck,
Father,” he said, changing the subject. “Might I be asking what you’re
seeking?”
   “A monk,” the big man growled, “a brother monk, that is—and a young
boy. I have scoured the wharf from top to bottom.”
   The tavernmaster smiled, polishing a metal flagon with his apron. “And
you came here last? Begging your pardon, Father, but I think your God’s
seen fit to test you.”
   The big man grunted, then looked up from his ale. “What do you mean?”
   “They were here, they were—if it’s the same two.”
   His satisfied smile froze on his face as the monk lurched up from the
bench. His reddened face was inches from the innkeeper’s own.
   “When?”
   “T-two, three d-days ago—I’m not sure . . .”
   “Are you really not sure,” the monk asked menacingly, “or do you just
want money?” He patted his robe. The innkeeper did not know if it was a
purse or a knife this strange man of God was patting for; he had never much
trusted Usires’ followers anyway, and living in Hernystir’s most
cosmopolitan town had not improved his opinion of them.
   “Oh, no, Father, truly! They . . . they were in a few days past. Asked after
a boat going down-coast to Perdruin. The monk was a short fellow, bald?
The lad thin-faced, black hair? They were here.”
   “What did you tell ’em?”
   “To go see Old Gealsgiath down by the Eirgid Ramh—that’s the tavern
with the oar painted on the front door, down near land’s end!”
   He broke off in alarm as the monk’s huge hands folded over his
shoulders. The innkeeper, a reasonably strong man, felt himself clasped as
securely as a child. A moment later he was reeling from a rib-crushing hug,
and could only stand wheezing as the monk pressed a gold Imperator into
his hand.
   “Merciful Usires bless your inn, Hernystirman!” the big man bellowed,
turning heads clear out in the street. “This is the first piece of luck I have
had since I began this God-cursed search!” He crashed out through the
doorway like a man leaving a burning house.
   The innkeeper took a painful breath, and clutched the coin, still warm
from the monk’s great paw.
   “Mad as a mooncalf, these Aedonites,” he told himself. “Touched.”




   She stood at the railing and watched Abaingeat sliding away, drawing
back into the fog. The wind ruffled her close-cropped black hair.
   “Brother Cadrach!” she called. “Come here. Is there anything so
glorious?” She gestured at the growing strip of green ocean that separated
them from the misty shoreline. Gulls wheeled and screeched above the
boat’s foaming wake.
   The monk waved a limp hand from where he crouched beside a clutch of
lashed-down barrels. “You enjoy yourself . . . Malachias. I have never been
much of a seafarer. God knows, I do not think this voyage will change that.”
He wiped spray—or sweat—from his forehead. Cadrach had not touched a
drop of wine since they had set foot on shipboard.
   Miriamele looked up to see a pair of Hernystiri sailors watching her
curiously from the foredeck. She dipped her head and walked over to seat
herself next to the monk.
   “Why did you come with me?” she asked after a while. “That is
something I still do not understand.”
   The monk did not look up. “I came because the lady paid me.”
   Miriamele pulled her hood forward. “There is nothing like the ocean to
remind you of what is important,” she said quietly, and smiled. Cadrach’s
returned smile was weak.
   “Ah, by the Good Lord, that’s true,” he groaned. “I am reminded that life
is sweet, that the sea is treacherous, and that I am a fool.”
   Miriamele nodded solemnly, staring up at the bellying sails. “Those are
good things to remember,” she said.