
                      Beneath the Uduntree




“There’s no hurrying it, Elias,” Guthwulf growled. “No hurrying.
Naglimund’s a tough nut . . . tough—you knew it’d be . . .” He could hear
himself slurring his words; he had needed to get drunk just to face his old
companion. The Earl of Utanyeat no longer felt comfortable around the
king, and felt even less so bringing him bad news.
   “You have had a fortnight. I have given you everything—troops, siege
engines—everything!” The king pulled at the skin of his face, frowning. He
was drawn and sickly, and had not yet met Guthwulf’s eyes. “I can wait no
longer. Tomorrow is Midsummer’s Eve!”
   “And why should that matter?” Guthwulf, feeling chilled and sick, turned
away and spit out the now-tasteless lump of citril root he had been chewing.
The king’s tent was as cold and dank as the bottom of a well. “No one has
ever taken one of the great houses in a fortnight except by treachery, even if
they were poorly defended—these Naglimunders have fought like cornered
animals. Be patient, Highness; patience is all we need. We can starve them
out in a matter of months.”
   “Months!” Elias’ laugh was hollow. “Months, he says, Pryrates!”
   The red priest offered a skeletal smile.
   The king’s laughter abruptly ceased, and he lowered his chin until it
almost touched the pommel of the long gray sword propped between his
knees. There was something about that sword that Guthwulf did not like,
although he knew it was foolish to have such thoughts about a mere thing.
Still, everywhere that Elias went these days the sword was with him, like
some pampered lapdog. “Today is your last chance, Utanyeat.” The High
King’s voice was thick and heavy. “Either the gate is opened, or I must
make . . . other arrangements.”
   Guthwulf stood, swaying. “Are you mad, Elias? Are you mad? How can
we possibly . . . the miners have scarcely dug halfway . . .” He trailed off
dizzily, wondering if he’d gone too far. “Why should we care whether
tomorrow is Midsummer’s Eve?” He dropped to a knee again, imploring.
“Talk to me, Elias.”
   The Earl had feared an explosive response from his angry king, but he
had also, distantly, hoped for some faint return of their old camaraderie. He
got neither.
   “You cannot understand, Utanyeat,” Elias replied, and his staring red-
rimmed eyes were fixed on the tent wall, or empty air. “I have . . . other
obligations. Tomorrow everything will change.”




   Simon had thought he had gained an understanding of winter. After the
trek across the desolate blankness of the Waste, the endless white days of
wind and snow and stinging eyes, he had been sure there were no further
lessons winter could teach him. After the first few days on Urmsheim he
was amazed by his former innocence.
   They traveled along the slender ice paths roped in file, digging in
carefully with toe and heel before taking each step. At times the rising wind
plucked at them as though they were tree leaves, and they had to shrink
back against Urmsheim’s icy side and cling until the wind subsided. The
footing, too, was treacherous; Simon, who had thought himself quite a
climber as master of the Hayholt’s high places, now found himself skidding
and clinging on narrow trackways barely two cubits from wall to precipice,
a whirling cloud of powdery snow the only thing between the path and the
distant earth. Looking down from Green Angel Tower, which had once
seemed the world’s summit, now seemed as childish and comforting as
standing atop a stool in the castle kitchen.
   From the mountain path he could soon see the tops of other peaks, and
clouds eddying about them. The northeast of Osten Ard lay spread before
him, but so distant he turned away from the view. It would not do to stare
down from such heights. It made his heart race and the breath catch in his
throat. Simon wished with all his heart he had remained behind, but now his
only hope to come down again was to keep climbing.
   He found himself often in prayer, and hoped that the loftiness of their
location would speed his words to Heaven all the faster.
   The sickening heights and his own fast-failing confidence were terrifying
enough, but Simon was also connected by the cord around his waist to all
the rest of the party but the unbound Sithi. Thus, there were not just his own
mistakes to worry over: a misstep by one of the others could pull them all
down, like a weighted fishing line, and send them plunging into the
limitless, vertiginous depths. Their progress was painfully slow, but no one,
Simon least of all, wanted it otherwise.

                                    •••

   Not that all the lessons of the mountain were painful ones. Although the
air was so thin and achingly cold that he sometimes felt another breath
might turn him to frozen stone, the very iciness of the atmosphere brought
with it an odd exaltation, a sensation of openness and insubstantiality, as
though a startling wind blew right through him.
   The icy mountain face itself was a thing of painful beauty. Simon had
never dreamed that ice might have color; the tame variety he knew, that
which festooned the roofs of the Hayholt at Aedontide and shrouded the
wells in Jonever, was diamond-clear or milky white. By contrast, the icy
armor of Urmsheim, warped, twisted, and buckled by wind and the
seemingly distant sun, was a dream-forest of colors and strange shapes.
Great ice-towers shot through with veins of sea-green and violet leaned out
above the heads of the toiling party. Elsewhere the ice cliffs had cracked
and fallen in crystalline chunks, gemlike raw edges etched in stormy blue,
crumbling into tesselate confusion like the abandoned blocks of some giant
architect.
   In one place the black bones of two frozen, long-dead trees stood like
abandoned sentinels before the rim of a white-misted crevice. The ice sheet
that stretched between them had been melted parchment-thin by the sun; the
mummified trees seemed the gateposts of Heaven, the ice between them a
shimmering, evanescent fan that shattered the dayshine into a glowing
rainbow of ruby and nectarine light, into swirls of gold and lavender and
pale rose that—Simon felt sure—would make even the famous windows of
the Sancellan Aedonitis seem dull as pondwater and candle-drip.

                                      •••

   But even as its brilliant skin beguiled the eyes, the mountain’s cold heart
schemed against its unwanted guests. Late in the afternoon of the first day,
even as Simon and his mortal comrades were trying to grow used to the
strange and deliberate pace forced upon them by Binabik’s shoe-spikes—
the Sithi, who disdained such devices, nevertheless climbed almost as
slowly and carefully as the others—darkness overtook the sky as suddenly
and thoroughly as ink spilled upon a blotter.
   “Lie down!” Binabik yelled, even as Simon and the two Erkynlandish
soldiers were staring up curiously at the spot where, moments before, the
sun had hung in the heavens. Behind Haestan and Grimmric, Sludig had
already flung himself down onto the hard snow. “Down to the ground!” the
troll shouted. Haestan pulled Simon down.
   Even as he was wondering if Binabik had seen something dangerous on
the trail ahead—and if so what the Sithi were doing, since they had
disappeared where the path bent around part of Urmsheim’s southeastern
flank—Simon heard the pitch of the wind, which had been a low, steady
whistle for hours, rise to a shriek. He felt a tug, then a hard pull, and dug his
fingers through the powdery snow into the icy pack beneath. A moment
later a crash of thunder banged painfully in both his ears. Even as the first
drumbeat was echoing down the valley below, another shook him as
Qantaqa might a captured rat. He whimpered and clung to the ground as the
wind raked him with bony fingers, and the thunder crashed again and again,
the mountain they clung to an anvil for some gargantuan and terrible
blacksmith.
   The storm halted as abruptly as it had descended. Simon crouched in
place for long moments after the wind’s scream had subsided, his forehead
pressed against the freezing ground. When he sat up at last, his ears ringing,
the white sun was emerging from the inksplatter of clouds. Beside him
Haestan was sitting up like a baffled child, his nose bleeding and his beard
full of snow.
   “By th’Aedon!” he swore. “By th’ sufferin’, bleedin’, sorrowful Aedon
and God th’Highest.” He wiped his nose with the back of his hand and
stared stupidly at the red streak left on his fur glove. “What . . . ?”
   “Lucky we are we stood on a wide part of the path,” Binabik said,
climbing to his feet. Although he, too, was covered in clinging snow, he
looked almost cheerful. “Here the storms come fast.”
   “Fast . . .” Simon muttered, looking down. He had pierced the ankle of
his right boot with the spikes strapped to the left, and the way it stung he
was sure he had drawn blood.
   A moment later Jiriki’s slender form appeared at the bend of the trail.
   “Have you lost anyone?” he shouted. When Binabik called back that all
were safe, the Sitha gave a mocking salute and vanished again.
   “I don’t see any snow on him,” Sludig remarked sourly.
   “Mountain storms are moving quickly,” the troll replied. “But so are
Sithi.”

                                    •••

   The seven travelers spent the first night together against the back wall of
a shallow ice cave on the mountain’s eastern face, with the far edge of the
narrow path only five or six cubits away, the black abyss waiting below. As
he sat shivering in the penetrating cold, comforted but unwarmed by the
quiet singing of Jiriki and An’nai, he remembered something Doctor
Morgenes had once told him in the heart of a drowsy afternoon, when
Simon had complained about living in the crowded, unprivate servant’s
quarters.
   “Never make your home in a place,” the old man had said, too lazy in
the spring warmth to do more than wag a finger. “Make a home for yourself
inside your own head. You’ll find what you need to furnish it—memory,
friends you can trust, love of learning, and other such things.” Morgenes
had grinned. “That way it will go with you wherever you journey. You’ll
never lack for a home—unless you lose your head, of course . . .”
   He was still not quite sure what exactly it was that the doctor had meant;
more than anything, he felt sure, he wanted a home to call his own once
more. Father Strangyeard’s bare room at Naglimund had begun to feel like
one in only a week. Still, there was a sort of romance to the idea of living
free on the road, making your home wherever you stopped, like a Hyrka
horsetrader. But he was ready for other things. It began to seem as though
he himself had been on the move for years—how long had it been, anyway?
   As he counted carefully back by the changes of the moon, with help from
Binabik where he had trouble remembering, he was dumbfounded to realize
that it had been . . . less than two months! Astonishing, but true: the troll
confirmed his guess, that three weeks of Yuven had passed, and Simon
knew for a fact that his journey had begun on ill-fated Stoning Night, the
last hours of Avrel. How the world had changed in seven weeks! And—he
reflected dully, as he tumbled toward sleep—mostly for the worse.

                                    •••

   In late morning the company was climbing a massive slab of ice that had
slid down from the mountain’s shoulder to lie athwart the path like a vast,
discarded package, when Urmsheim struck again. With a horrifying, grating
sound a long wedge of the icy slab crackled from blue-gray to white and
broke loose, sliding away beneath Grimmric’s feet to plunge, crumbling,
down the mountainside. The Erkynlander had time only for a brief surprised
shout; a moment later he had tumbled out of sight into the gash the wedge
had left behind. Before he could think, Simon felt himself jerked ahead by
Grimmric’s fall. He tumbled forward, flinging out a desperate hand to catch
at the ice-wall; the black crevice came ever closer. Helplessly horrified, he
saw a thin slice of empty air through the crack in the path, and beyond that
the dim form of the crags half a league below. He screamed and felt himself
skid forward, his fingers clutching fruitlessly at the slippery path.
   Binabik was leading the rope, and his experienced swiftness allowed him
to dive forward when he heard the shattering ice; he sprawled face down,
clutching the ice with one gloved hand, digging his axe and spikes in as
deeply as he could. Haestan’s broad hand now caught at Simon’s belt, but
even the bearded guardsman’s bulk could not halt their inexorable slide.
Grimmric’s hidden weight pulled them down, even as he cried piteously
below the crevice-edge and swung from side to side, suspended by the rope
above snow-swirling nothingness. At the back of the line Sludig dug in,
temporarily halting Simon and Haestan’s movement, and shouted anxiously
for the Sithi.
   An’nai and Prince Jiriki came pelting back along the mountain path,
touching as lightly on the powdery surface as snow hares. They quickly dug
their own axes deep into the ice and lashed them to the end of Binabik’s
rope with swift knots. The troll, thus freed, edged around the crevice with
the two Sithi, and back to help Sludig.
   Simon felt the tug on his belt strengthen, and the crevice slowly began to
recede. He was sliding backward. He wasn’t going to die!—at least, it
seemed, not this moment. As he regained his footing he bent to snatch up
one of his fallen mittens, and his head pounded.
   With all the party now heaving at the ropes, they at last brought
Grimmric—senseless now, his face gray within his hood—back up through
the gap in the ice where he could be dragged to safety. It was long minutes
after he awoke before Grimmric could recognize his companions, and he
was shaking as with a deadly fever. Sludig and Haestan rigged a sling from
two fur cloaks to carry him until they could stop and make camp.
   When they found a deep cleft that ran back into the mountain until it
reached actual stone, the sun was only slightly past the midpoint of the sky,
but they had no choice except to make early camp. They lit a small fire,
scarcely more than knee-high, with kindling they had scavenged at
Urmsheim’s feet and carried up into its heights for just such a reason.
Shuddering Grimmric lay beside it, teeth a-chatter, waiting for the troll-
draught that Binabik, mixing herbs and powders from his pack with
snowmelt, was laboring to prepare. No one begrudged Grimmric the
precious heat.
   As the afternoon progressed, and the narrow sliver of sun that arrowed
down into the cleft rose up the blue walls and then disappeared, an even
deeper and more agonizing chill set in. Simon, his muscles trembling like
lute strings, ears aching despite his fur hood, felt himself sliding—as
precipitously and helplessly as he had slid toward the naked emptiness of
the crevice—toward a waking dream. But instead of the bleak cold he
expected, his dream reached out to welcome him with warm and fragrant
arms.

                                    •••
   It was summer again—how long had it been? No mind, for the seasons
had swung around at last, and the hot, expectant air was full of the sizzle of
bees. The spring’s flowers now hung swollen and overripe, crisping brown
at the edges like Judith’s mutton pies baking in the castle ovens. In the fields
below the Hayholt’s walls the grass was turning yellow, beginning the
alchemical transformation that would end in Autumn, when it would be
piled in golden, fragrant ricks, dotting the land like tiny cottages.
   Simon could hear the shepherds singing drowsily, echoing the bees as
they led their bleating charges across the meadows. Summer! Soon, he
knew, would come the festivals . . . Saint Sutrin’s, Hlafmansa—but first his
own favorite, Midsummer’s Eve . . .
   Midsummer’s Eve, when everything was different and all was disguised,
when bemasked friends and costumed enemies mingled unknowing in the
breathless darkness . . . when music played all through the sleepless night,
and the Hedge Garden was festooned with silver ribbons, and laughing,
leaping shapes populated the Moon’s Hours . . .

                                     •••

   “Seoman?” A hand was on his shoulder, gently shaking. “Seoman, you
are weeping. Wake up.”
   “The dancers . . . the masks . . .”
   “Wake up!” The hand shook him again, more vigorously. He opened his
eyes to see Jiriki’s narrow face, all forehead and cheekbones in the dim,
angled light.
   “You seemed to be having a frightening dream,” the Sitha said as he sank
into a crouch at Simon’s side.
   “But . . . but it wasn’t really.” He shivered. “It was s-summer . . . it was
Midsummer’s Eve . . .”
   “Ah.” Jiriki raised an eyebrow, then shrugged sinuously. “I think,
perhaps you have been wandering in realms where you should not go.”
   “What could be bad about summer?”
   The prince of the Sithi shrugged again, then produced from inside his
cloak—with a gesture like a favorite uncle producing a toy to distract a
sniffling child—a shiny object in a delicately-carved wooden frame.
   “Do you know what this is?” Jiriki asked.
   “A . . . a mirror . . .” Simon was unaware of what the Sitha was asking.
Did he know Simon had handled it in the cave?
   Jiriki smiled. “Yes. A very special mirror, one that has a very long
history. Do you know what can be done with such a thing? Besides shaving
the face as men do?” he reached over and tapped a cool finger on Simon’s
furry cheek. “Can you guess?”
   “S-s-see things that are f-far away?” he replied after a moment’s
hesitation, then waited for the explosion of temper he was sure would come.
   The Sitha stared. “You have heard of the mirrors of the Fair Folk?” he
said at last, wondering. “Still they are the subject of tales and songs?”
   Now Simon had a chance to slide away from the truth. Instead, he
surprised himself.
   “No. I looked at it when we were in your hunting lodge.”
   Even more surprisingly, this admission only widened Jiriki’s eyes. “You
saw other places in it? More than reflection?”
   “I saw . . . I saw Princess M-Miriamele—my friend,” he nodded, and
patted her blue scarf where it wound about his neck. “It was like a dream.”
   The Sitha scowled down at the mirror, not angrily, but as if it were the
surface of a pool beneath which darted an elusive fish he wished to locate.
   “You are a strong-willed young man,” Jiriki said slowly, “stronger than
you know—either that or you are touched by other powers, somehow . . .”
He looked from Simon back to the mirror, and was silent for a time.
   “It is a very old thing, this mirror,” he said at last. “It is said to be a scale
of the Greater Worm.”
   “What does that mean?”
   “The Greater Worm, the one that many stories say encircles the world.
We Sithi, though, see the Worm as circling all worlds at once, those of
waking and those of dreaming . . . those that were, and those that will be.
His tail is in his mouth, so he has no end or beginning.”
   “A worm? Do you mean a d-d-dragon?”
   Jiriki nodded once, an abrupt motion like a bird pecking grain. “It is also
told that all dragons are descended from the Greater Worm, and that each is
less than the ones that went before. Igjarjuk and Shurakai were less great
than their mother Hidohebhi, as she in turn was not as great as her parent
Khaerukama’o the Golden. Someday, if all this is true, the dragons will
disappear altogether—if they have not already.”
    “That w-would be good,” Simon said.
    “Would it?” Jiriki smiled again, but his eyes were cold, shiny stones.
“Men grow while the great worms . . . and others . . . diminish. That seems
to be the way of things.” He stretched, with the shuddering, slippery grace
of a new-wakened cat. “The way of things,” he repeated. “Still, I brought
out this scale of the Greater Worm to show you something. Would you like
to see, manchild?”
    Simon nodded.
    “This has been a difficult journey for you.” Jiriki flicked a glance over
his shoulder to where the others were gathered around Grimmric and the
tiny campfire. Only An’nai glanced up, and some unreadable
communication flickered between the two Sithi. “Look,” said Jiriki a
moment later.
    The looking glass, cupped in his hands like a precious drink of water,
seemed almost to ripple. The darkness it held—split by a jagged slash of
light gray, the reflection of the sky above their crevice—seemed to slowly
sprout points of green light, like strange vegetable stars germinating in the
evening sky. “I will show you a true summer,” Jiriki said softly, “truer than
any you have known.”
    The flecks of shining green began to flutter and coalesce, sparkling
emerald fishes rising to the surface of a shadowy pond. Simon felt himself
sinking into the mirror, although he did not move from where he leaned
above it. The green became many greens, as many shades and tints as ever
were. In a moment they had resolved themselves into a startling confusion
of bridges and towers and trees: a city and a forest grown together,
sprouting as one in the midst of a grassy plain—not a city a forest had
grown over, like Da’ai Chikiza, but a thriving, living amalgam of plant and
polished stone, myrtle, jade, and viridian.
    “Enki-e-Shao’saye,” Jiriki whispered. The grass on the plain bent
luxuriantly before the wind; scarlet, white, and sky-blue pennants fluttered
like blossoms amid the city’s branching spires. “The last and greatest city of
the Summer.”
    “Where . . . is . . . it . . . ?” Simon breathed, astonished and bewitched by
its beauty.
    “Not so much where, manchild, as when. The world is not only vaster
than you know, Seoman, it is also far, far older. Enki-e-Shao’saye is long
crumbled now. It lay east of the great forest.”
   “Crumbled?”
   “It was the last place where Zida’ya and Hikeda’ya lived together, before
the Parting. It was a city of great craft and greater beauty; the very wind in
the towers made music, and the lamps of night shone bright as stars.
Nenais’u danced under moonlight by her forest pool, and the admiring trees
leaned down to watch.” He shook his head slowly. “All gone. Those were
the summer-days of my people. We are now far into the Autumn . . .”
   “Gone . . . ?” Simon could still not grasp the tragedy. It seemed as though
he could reach into the mirror, touch one of the needle-sharp towers with
his finger. He felt tears struggling to break free. No home. The Sithi had lost
their homes . . . they were lonely and homeless in the world.
   Jiriki passed his hand over the glass, and it clouded. “Gone,” he said.
“But as long as there is memory, Summer remains. And even Winter
passes.” He turned and looked long at Simon, and the agonized expression
on the youth’s face at last brought a small, careful smile to his own.
   “Do not mourn so,” he said, and patted Simon’s arm. “Brightness is not
completely erased from the world—not yet. And not all beautiful places
have fallen to ruin. Still there is Jao é-Tinukai’i, the dwelling of my family
and people. Perhaps someday, if we both come down safely from this
mountain, you will see it.” He grinned his strange grin, thinking of
something. “Perhaps you will . . .”

                                     •••

   The rest of the climb up Urmsheim—three more days on narrow,
dangerous pathways scarcely more than ice-ribbons, over sheer, glassy
sheets by laboriously hacked hand and footholds; two more nights of evil,
teeth-grinding cold—passed by Simon like a fleeting but painful dream.
Through the terrible weariness that beset him he held onto Jiriki’s gift of
summer—for it was a gift, he knew—and was comforted. Even as his numb
fingers struggled to cling, and his numb feet to stay on the path, he thought
that somewhere there would be warmth again, and something like a bed and
clean clothes—even a bath would be welcome! All those things were out
there somewhere, if he could just keep his head down and get off the
mountain alive.
   When you stopped to think about it, he reflected, there weren’t many
things in life one truly needed. To want too much was worse than greed: it
was stupidity—a waste of precious time and effort.
   The company slowly worked their way around the body of the mountain
until the sun rose each morning to shine over their right shoulders. The air
was growing painfully thin, forcing frequent halts for the catching of
breath; even hardy Jiriki and uncomplaining An’nai were moving more
slowly, limbs weighted as though by heavy garments. The human
companions, except for the troll, positively dragged. Grimmric had revived,
thanks to the potency of Binabik’s Qanuc elixir, but shivered and coughed
as he climbed.
   From time to time the wind increased, sending the clouds that hugged
Urmsheim’s shoulders flying like tattered ghosts. The mountain’s silent
neighbors would slowly materialize, jagged peaks holding lofty convention
far above the surface of Osten Ard, indifferent to the sordid and minuscule
landscape at their feet. Binabik, as comfortable breathing the insubstantial
air of the Roof of the World as he had been sitting in Naglimund’s pantry,
pointed out wide, craggy Mintahoq in the east to his gasping companions,
as well as several of the other mountains compassing the troll-fells of
Yiqanuc.

                                    •••

    They came upon it suddenly, while fully half the mountain’s height still
towered above them. Struggling over a rocky outcropping, the rope pulled
taut as a bowstring between them, every breath burning their lungs, they
heard one of the Sithi—who had climbed ahead and out of sight—let out a
strange, whistling cry. The companions scrambled toward the top with all
possible haste; the question of what they were hurrying toward dangled
unspoken. Binabik, leading the line, stopped on the hillcrest; he swayed a
little to keep his balance.
    “Daughter of the Mountains!” the troll gasped, a plume of vapor rising
from his mouth. He stood and did not move for long moments. Simon
carefully mounted the last few steps.
    At first he saw nothing before him but another wide valley of snow, its
white wall rising across from them, open on the right to the air and sky and
a succession of snowy cliffs that dropped away down the side of Urmsheim.
He turned to Binabik to ask what had made him cry out. The question died
on his lips.
   On the left hand the valley dug deep into the mountain’s face, the valley
floor sloping up as its high walls gradually angled together. At their apex,
stretching up from the ground to the triangle of gray-blue sky, loomed the
Uduntree.
   “Elysia Mother of God!” Simon said, his voice cracking. “Mother of
God,” he repeated.
   At first, confronted by the vast, mad, implausibility of the thing, he
thought it was a tree—a titanic tree of ice a thousand feet tall, myriad
branches sparkling and coruscating in the noonday sun, shadowed at its
impossible summit by a halo of mist. It was only as he finally convinced
himself it was real—that such a thing could exist in a world that also
contained such mundane objects as pigs and fences and mixing-bowls—that
he began to understand what it was: a frozen waterfall, the accumulation of
years of icy snowmelt captured in a million icicles, a crystalline tracery
down the jagged stone-spine that formed the Uduntree’s trunk.
   Jiriki and An’nai stood transfixed a few ells below the valley floor,
staring up at the tree. Simon, following Binabik, began struggling down the
slope toward them, feeling the rope around his waist grow tense as
Grimmric reached the summit and was himself struck motionless; Simon
then waited patiently as the process was repeated two more times for
Haestan and Sludig. At last they all made their stumbling, preoccupied way
down to the deep snow of the valley floor. The Sithi were quietly singing,
and paid no heed to the arrival of their human companions.
   For a long while no one spoke. The majesty of the Uduntree almost
seemed to suck the breath from their bodies, and for a great span of time the
companions just stood and stared, feeling emptied.
   “Let us be going forward,” Binabik said at last. Simon started resentfully.
The troll’s voice seemed a rude intrusion.
   “T’is th’ d-d-damnedest sight my eyes have ever h-held,” Grimmric
stuttered.
   “Here old black One-Eye climbed to the stars,” Sludig said quietly. “God
save me from blasphemy, but I can feel his presence still.”
    Binabik started out across the open valley floor. The others followed
after a few moments, tugged along by the troll’s harness rope. The snow
was thigh-deep and slow going. After they had moved some thirty difficult
steps, Simon finally tore his eyes from the spectacle to look back. An’nai
and Jiriki had not joined them; the two Sithi still stood side by side, as if
waiting for something.
    They moved forward. The valley walls leaned ever closer above their
heads as though fascinated by these rare travelers. Simon could see that the
base of the ice-tree was a huge, jumbled, hole-dotted rockery sheltered
beneath the arching lower branches—not true branches, but rather layer
upon spreading layer of melted and refrozen icicles, each one wider than the
one above, so that the bottommost branches made a ceiling half as wide as a
tourney field over the strew of boulders.
    They had come close enough that the great ice-pillar seemed to extend
through the very roof of the sky. As he bent his neck painfully for one last
glimpse at the near-vanished peak of the tree, a rush of surprise and fear ran
over him, blackening his sight for a moment.
    The tower! From my dreams, the tower with branches! Stunned, he
tripped and tumbled into the snow. Haestan reached down a broad hand and
lifted him without a word. Simon chanced another look up, and a
frightening sensation that was more than mere dizziness sluiced over him.
    “Binabik!” he cried. The troll, just passing into the violet darkness of the
Uduntree’s shadow, turned swiftly.
    “Quiet, Simon!” he hissed. “We have no knowing if we may knock sharp
ice loose, much to our regret.”
    Simon made his way forward through the clinging snow as quickly as he
could.
    “Binabik, this is the tower I dreamed—a white tower with branches like
a tree! This is it!”
    The troll surveyed the clutter of huge boulders and shattered rock in the
tree’s dark underside. “I thought it was your belief you saw Green Angel
Tower, from the Hayholt?”
    “I did—that is to say, it was part of both. But since I’d never seen this
before, I didn’t know that some of it was some of this! Do you
understand?!”
   Binabik cocked a bushy black eyebrow. “When we are next finding time,
I will cast the bones. Now we have a mission still unperformed.”
   He waited until the others had straggled up before speaking again. “It is
my thought,” he said at last, “that we should be soon making a camp. Then
we can spend the last hours of daylight hunting for some sign of Colmund’s
company, or the sword Thorn.”
   “Are them . . .” Haestan indicated the now-distant Sithi, “. . . goin’
t’help?”
   Before Binabik could voice an opinion, Grimmric whistled excitedly and
pointed up at the jumble of rocks. “Look, you!” he said, “I think there’s
been someone stayin’ here before. Look at th’ rocks there!”
   Simon followed the soldier’s finger to a spot farther up the sloping pile
of rocks, where several rows of stones had been piled in the mouth of one
of the cavelike holes.
   “Y’r right!” Haestan exclaimed. “He’s right! Sure as Tunath’s Bones lie
north t’south, someone made th’selves a camp there.”
   “Careful!” Binabik said urgently, but Simon had already shed his harness
and was making his way up the scree, setting off tiny avalanches where he
stepped incautiously. He reached the cave in short moments, and stood,
teetering on a loose stone.
   “This wall was made by men, that’s certain!” he called back excitedly.
The cavern mouth was perhaps three ells wide, and somebody had hurriedly
but not unskillfully set rock to rock across the front—to keep in warmth,
perhaps? To keep out animals?
   “Kindly do not shout, Simon,” Binabik said. “We will be up directly with
you.”
   Waiting impatiently, all thoughts of thin air and killing cold in abeyance,
Simon watched the company climb after him. Even as Haestan began his
clamber up the pile, the two Sithi appeared beneath the eaves of the
Uduntree. After taking in the scene for a moment they mounted up to the
cave as nimbly as branch-leaping squirrels.
   It took a moment for Simon’s eyes to adjust to the more profound
darkness inside the low cavern. When he could finally see, it took only a
moment more for his eyes to widen with shock.
   “Binabik! It’s . . . they’re . . .”
   The troll, able to stand upright at his side where Simon crouched,
brought the heel of his hand against his breastbone.
   “Qinkipa . . . !” he said. “They have been waiting for our coming.”
   The cave was scattered with the brown bones of men. The skeletons,
naked but for fittings and jewelry of corroded black and green metal, sat
propped against the cavern’s walls. A thin layer of ice covered everything,
like preserving glass.
   “Is it Colmund?” Simon asked.
   “Usires save us,” Sludig choked behind him, “get out, the air must be
poison!”
   “There is no poison here,” Binabik chided him. “As to whether it is Sir
Colmund’s party—the chances seem to me good.”
   “It is interesting to wonder how they might have died,” Jiriki’s voice was
startlingly resonant in the small cavern. “If they froze, why did they not
huddle together for warmth?” He indicated the scattering of the bodies
about the chamber. “If they were killed by some animal—or each other—
then why are the bones arranged so carefully, as if each lay down to die in
turn?”
   “There are mysteries here worth much talking someday,” the troll
responded, “but we have other duties, and light is failing fast.”
   “All of you,” Sludig said, his voice strained with some terrible urgency,
“come here! Here!”
   He stood over one of the skeletons. Although the bones had collapsed
into a madder-colored heap, still it had the look of someone caught in the
act of prayer, kneeling with arms outstretched. Between the bones of its two
hands, which lay half-submerged in ice like stones in a bowl of milk, was a
long bundle wrapped in frosted, rotting oilcloth.
   All the air suddenly seemed to leak out of the cavern. A taut, deadening
silence fell on the company. The troll and the Rimmersman kneeled, as if in
imitation of the ancient bones, and began chipping away at the frozen
bundle with their ice-axes. The oilcloth came away in chips, like bark. A
long strip splintered away to reveal a profound blackness beneath.
   “It’s not metal,” said Simon in disappointment.
   “Nor is Thorn made of metal,” Binabik grunted, “or of no metal you
have ever been seeing.”
   Sludig was able to wiggle the point of his axe in beneath the petrified
cloth, and with Haestan’s straining help they tore loose another strip. Simon
gasped. Binabik was right: this thing emerging like a jet-black butterfly
from its prisoning chrysalis was not only a sword, it was a sword like no
other he had ever seen: long as a man’s arms spread wide, fingertip to
fingertip, and black. The purity of its blackness was unmarred by the colors
that sparkled on its edge, as though the blade was so supernaturally sharp
that it even sliced the dim light of the cavern into rainbows. Had it not been
for the silver cord wrapped around the hilt as a handgrip—leaving the
uncovered guard and pommel as pitchy as the rest of its length—it would
have seemed to bear no relationship to mankind at all. Rather, despite its
symmetry, it would have seemed some natural growth, some pure essence
of nature’s blackness extruded by chance in the form of an exquisite sword.
   “Thorn,” Binabik whispered, a sort of reverence coloring his
satisfaction.
   “Thorn,” Jiriki repeated, and Simon could not even try to guess the
thoughts behind his naming of the thing.
   “So this is it, then?” Sludig said at last. “It is a beautiful thing. What
could kill them with such a blade in their possession?”
   “Who can know what happened to Colmund?” Binabik said. “But even a
sword like Thorn you cannot eat when there is being no food.”
   They all continued to stare at the blade. Grimmric, who was closest to
the cave mouth, at last straightened out his crouch, hugging himself with
thin arms.
   “As th’troll says, y’can’t eat swords. I’m goin’ t’make fire for th’night.”
He stepped outside the cavern and stood, stretching. He whistled a little; the
tune, weak at first, grew stronger.
   “There is scrub brush in the rock crevices that might burn with our
kindling,” Sludig called after him.
   Haestan leaned forward, then touched the black blade with a cautious
finger. “Cold,” he smiled. “No surprise that, is’t?” He turned to Binabik,
oddly diffident. “May I lift it?”
   The troll nodded. “Carefully.”
   Haestan slipped his fingers gently under the cord-wrapped hilt and
pulled, but the sword did not move. “Frozen,” he guessed. He tugged again,
harder, with no better result. “Frozen up hard, ’tis,” he panted, pulling now
with all his might. His breath rose in a cloud.
   Sludig leaned over to help him. Grimmric, outside the cavern, stopped
whistling and said something unintelligible.
   As the Rimmersman and the Erkynlander both heaved, the black sword
at last began to move, but rather than snapping free of prisoning ice the
blade merely slid a little to one side, then stopped.
   “It is not frozen,” Sludig gasped. “It is as heavy as a millstone. We two
together can barely move it!”
   “How will we get it down the mountain, Binabik?” Simon asked. He
wanted to laugh. It was all so silly and strange—to find a magic sword and
then not be able to carry it away! He reached his own hand forward and felt
the deep, cool weight of the thing—and something else. A warming? Yes,
some indefinable life beneath the cold surface, like a sleeping serpent
stirring into wakefulness—or was he imagining things?
   Binabik stared at the immobile blade and scratched his shaggy hair,
thinking. A moment later Grimmric appeared in the cavern, waving his
arms. As they turned to look at him, he slumped to his knees, then toppled
over, limp as a sack of meal.
   A black arrow, a thorn of a different sort, quivered in his back.




   Blue light bathed the silver mask, touching its contours with pale fire.
The face beneath had once been the model for its sculpted, inhuman beauty,
but what the mask now covered no living creature could say. The world had
made uncountable revolutions since the face of Utuk’ku had disappeared
forever behind its gleaming lines.
   The blue-brushed mask turned and surveyed the giant, many-shadowed
stone hall, eyeing her scurrying servitors as they labored to do all that she
had bid them. Their voices were raised in songs of praise and remembrance;
their white hair fluttered in the eternal winds of the Chamber of the Harp.
She listened with approval as the clatter of witchwood hammers echoed
through the endless maze of corridors riddling frozen Nakkiga, the
mountain the Norns called Mask of Tears. The mortals called her home
Stormspike, and Utuk’ku knew that it haunted their dreams . . . as it should.
The silver face nodded, satisfied. All was in readiness.
   Suspended in the mist that crowned the Great Well, the Harp suddenly
moaned, a desolate sound like wind in the high passes. The Norn Queen
knew it was not His voice—not He who could make the Breathing Harp
sing and howl, not He whose wrathful song sent the entire well-chamber
thundering with impossible musics. Some lesser voice was crawling
through the Harp, trapped in its infinite complexities like an insect in a
sealed maze.
   She lifted a silver-and-white-gloved finger mere inches above the black
stone of her chair and made a small gesture. The moan became louder, and
something quivered into substantiality in the fog above the Well—the gray
sword Jingizu, pulsing with painful light. Something held it: a shadowy
figure, its hand a formless knot around Jingizu’s hilt.
   Utuk’ku understood. She did not have to see the supplicant; the sword
was there, far more real than any mortal temporarily allowed to possess it.
   Who comes before the Queen of the Hikeda’ya? she asked, knowing the
answer full well.
   Elias, High King of Osten Ard, the shadowy figure replied. I have
decided to accept the terms of your master.
   The word “master” nettled her. Mortal, she said at last, with queenly
languor, what you wish will be given to you. But you have waited long . . .
almost too long.
   There were . . . The shadowy thing holding the sword swayed, as if
weary. How fleshy, how weak these mortals were! How could they have
caused such damage? I thought, it continued, . . . that things would be . . .
different. Now I submit.
   Of course you do. And you shall receive what was promised to you.
   Thank you, O Queen. And I shall give you what I have promised in
return . . .
   Of course you will.
   She lowered her gloved fingers, and the apparition vanished. Red light
bloomed deep in the Well as He came. As He took possession of it, the
Harp vibrated to a note of perfect triumph.
    “I . . . don’t want t’die . . . !” Grimmric wheezed. A froth of blood on his
chin and cheek, his crooked teeth standing in his gaping mouth, he looked
like a hare caught and savaged by hounds. “It’s . . . it’s so bloody cold,” he
shivered.
    “Who did it?” Simon squeaked, losing control of his voice in shock and
panic.
    “Whoever,” Haestan muttered, ashen-faced as he bent over his stricken
countryman, “they got us like coney up a plug-hole.”
    “We must get out!” Sludig snapped.
    “Wrap cloaks around arms,” Binabik said, assembling his blowpipe from
the pieces of his walking stick. “We are having no shields against arrows,
but that will be some help.”
    Without a word Jiriki stepped over Haestan and the fallen Grimmric,
moving toward the mouth of the cave. An’nai, tight-lipped, followed.
    “Prince Jiriki . . . ?” Binabik began, but the Sithi paid no heed.
    “Come then,” Sludig said, “we cannot let them go out alone.” He
snatched up his blade from the cloak where he had set it.
    Even as the others followed the Sithi to the cave mouth, Simon looked
down at the black sword Thorn. They had come such a long way to find it
—were they to lose it now? What if they escaped, but were cut off from the
cavern and could not come back? He put his hand on its hilt and again felt
the strange, thrumming sensation. He tugged, and to his amazement it came
up in his hand. The weight of it was tremendous, but using two hands he
was able to lift it off the frozen cave floor.
    What was happening here? He was dizzied. Two strong men could not
lift it, but he could. Magic?
    Simon cautiously carried the long, achingly heavy blade to where his
companions stood. Haestan untied his cloak, but instead of wrapping it
around his arm for protection he laid it gently over Grimmric. The wounded
man coughed, bringing up more blood. Both Erkynlanders were crying.
    Before Simon could say a word about the sword, Jiriki strode from the
cave mouth onto the rocky porch, cocky as a juggler.
   “Stand forward!” he shouted, and the icy walls of the valley sent the
echoes tumbling back. “Who attacks the company of Prince Jiriki i-
Sa’onserei, son of Shima’onari and scion of the House of Year-Dancing?
Who would war on the Zida’ya?”
   In answer a dozen figures clambered down the sloping valley walls and
stood, a hundred ells from the base of the Uduntree. All were armed, all
wore glare-masks and hooded white cloaks, and each bore on his breast the
triangular badge of Stormspike.
   “Norns?” Simon gasped, forgetting for an instant the strange object
cradled in his arms.
   “These are not Hikeda’ya,” said An’nai shortly. “They are mortals who
do Utuk’ku’s bidding.”
   One of the cloaked men took a limping, stiff-legged pace forward. Simon
recognized the sunburned skin and pale beard. “Go away, Zida’ya,” Ingen
Jegger said. His voice was slow and cold. “The Queen’s Huntsman has no
quarrel with you. It is those mortals cowering behind who have thwarted
me, and who cannot be allowed to leave this place.”
   “They are under my protection, mortal man.” Prince Jiriki patted his
sword. “Go back and sit beneath Utuk’ku’s table—you will get no scraps
here.”
   Ingen Jegger nodded. “So be it.” He waved a negligent hand and one of
his huntsmen swiftly drew his bow and fired. Jiriki sprang aside, pulling
Sludig along, who had stood just at his back. The arrow shattered on a rock
beside the cave mouth.
   “Down!” the prince shouted, even as An’nai let fly an arrow in return.
   The huntsmen scattered, leaving one of their company face down in the
snow. Simon and his companions went skittering down the slippery rocks to
the base of the ice-tree as arrows hummed past.
   Within minutes both sides’ meager ration of arrows had been exhausted,
but not before Jiriki had feathered another of Ingen’s raiders, putting a barb
in the running man’s eye as neatly as shooting an apple balanced on a stone
wall. Nearby, Sludig was stricken in the fleshy part of his thigh, but the
arrow had caromed off a stone first and the Rimmersman was able to pluck
the head out and limp to shelter.
   Simon crouched behind a stone promontory, part of the Uduntree’s trunk,
cursing himself for leaving his bow and precious arrows in the cave. He
watched as An’nai, his own quiver exhausted, cast bow aside and pulled his
slender dark sword from its sheath; the face of the Sitha was as implacable
as if he had been mending fences. Simon was sure his own must be a mirror
of his overwhelming inner fear, of his tripping heart and hollow stomach.
He looked down at Thorn, and felt a pulse of life in it. The heaviness had
become different somehow, animate, as though it were full of rattling bees;
it seemed a bound animal, stirring as it breathed the enticing scents of
freedom.
    A short way to his left, on the far side of the stone trunk, Haestan and
Sludig were slinking forward, using the great curving branches of ice for
cover. Safe now from arrows, Ingen was gathering his huntsmen for a
charge on the valley floor.
    “Simon!” a voice hissed. Startled, he turned around to see Binabik
crouching on the stone prominence above his head.
    “What will we do?” Simon asked, trying to keep his voice level but not
succeeding. The troll, however, was staring down at the black length of
Thorn, nestled in Simon’s arms like a child.
    “How . . . ?” Binabik asked, his round face full of surprise.
    “I don’t know, I only picked it up! I don’t know! What are we going to
do?”
    The troll shook his head. “You are now to stay right here. I am going to
help with what I can. I wish that I had a spear.” He sprang down lightly, his
heel spattering Simon with a flirt of gravel as he bounded past.
    “For Josua Lackhand!” Haestan shouted, and charged out from the eaves
of the Uduntree onto the white valley floor, Sludig limping purposefully
behind. As soon as they reached the deep snow they slowed as if running in
treacle. Ingen’s huntsmen slogged toward them, performing the same
halting, deadly dance.
    Haestan swung up his heavy sword, but before he even reached the
attackers the first white-cloaked figure fell, clutching his throat.
    “Yiqanuc!” Binabik shouted in triumph, then crouched to reload his
blowpipe.
    The clang of swords reverberated as the first of Ingen’s men reached
Haestan and Sludig. The Sithi were there a moment later, moving nimbly
over the snow, but still the companions were far outnumbered. A moment
later tall Haestan caught the flat of a blade on his hooded skull and went
down in a puff of snow. Only An’nai leaping forward to stand over him
prevented his being skewered on the spot.
   Blades shimmered in the thin sunlight, and cries of pain and rage almost
drowned the clash of metal. Simon saw with a sinking heart that Binabik,
whose remaining darts had proved useless against the thick cloaks of
huntsmen, was pulling his long knife from his belt.
   How can he be so brave? He’s too small—they’ll kill him before he can
get close enough to use it!
   “Binabik!” he shouted, and climbed to his feet. He lifted the heavy black
sword over his head, feeling its great weight dragging at him even as he
stumbled forward.
   The ground suddenly pitched beneath his feet. He staggered, spread-
legged, and then felt the very mountain seem to sway. A rumbling screech
pierced his ears, like the sound of a heavy stone dragged across a quarry.
The combatants stopped, dumbfounded, and stared down at their feet.
   With another horrible shriek of tortured ice the ground began to bulge. In
the center of the valley floor, only a few cubits from where Ingen Jegger
stood gaping in horrible confusion, a great slab of ice pushed upward,
cracking and buckling as it came, snow sliding off in great drifts.
   Propelled by the sudden shifting of the ground beneath him, Simon
tripped and tumbled forward, holding tightly onto Thorn, and came to a
stop virtually in the middle of the combatants. No one seemed to notice
him: they were all frozen in place as if the very ice of the Uduntree had
turned their blood to immobilizing frost, goggling at the impossible thing
pushing its way up from beneath the snow.
   The ice dragon.
   A snakelike head as long as a man thrust out of the new-formed crevice,
white-scaled above a toothy mouth, the staring eyes blue and occluded. It
waved sinuously from side to side on its long neck, as though curiously
observing the minute creatures who had awakened it from years-long
slumber. Then, terrifyingly swift, it darted out and caught one of the
huntsmen in its jaws, biting him in half and swallowing his legs. His
crushed, bloodied torso fell into the snow like a discarded rag.
   “Igjarjuk!—it is Igjarjuk!” came Binabik’s thin shout. The gleaming
ivory head snapped up another shrieking, white-cloaked morsel. As the rest
scattered, their faces emptied by unthinking horror, splay-clawed white feet
gripped the crevice’s rim, and the dragon’s long body, back covered with
strange, pale fur, yellowed as old parchment, humped slowly up from
below. A whiplike tail, long as a jousting run, swept two of the huntsmen
wailing into the pit.
   Simon sat stunned upon the snow, unable to force belief in the monstrous
thing that crouched on the rim of the ice-crevice like a cat on a chairback.
The long-snouted head dipped to regard him, and the murky, unblinking
blue eyes fixed his with calm, ageless malice. His head throbbed, as though
he tried to stare through water—those eyes, hollow as glacial crevices! It
saw him, it knew him in some way—it was as old as the bones of the
mountains, as wise and cruel and uncaring as Time itself.
   The jaws parted and a sliver of black tongue knifed out, tasting the air.
The head bobbed closer.
   “Ske’i, spawn of Hidohebhi!” a voice shouted. An instant later An’nai
had vaulted onto the creature’s hindquarters, grasping the thick fur for
support. Singing, he lifted his sword and hacked at a scaly leg. Simon got to
his feet and stumbled back, even as the dragon brought up its tail and
smashed the Sitha away; An’nai flew fifty cubits to land crumpled in the
snow at the valley’s exposed rim, nothing beyond him but mist. Jiriki ran
after with a cry of anger and despair.
   “Simon!” the troll shouted, “Run! We can do nothing!”
   Even as he spoke the mist that had enshrouded Simon’s wits began to
clear. In a moment he was on his feet, flying after Jiriki. Binabik, who had
been perched on the crevice’s far rim, flung himself backward as the dragon
lashed out, and the great jaws snapped shut on nothing with a sound like an
iron gate. The troll fell into a rift in the ice and disappeared.
   Jiriki huddled over the body of An’nai, motionless as a statue. Pelting
toward him, Simon looked back over his shoulder to see Igjarjuk slithering
down from the broken battlement of ice and moving across the little valley,
short legs gripping the ice as it wound along the ground, quickly narrowing
the distance between itself and its stumbling prey.
   Simon tried to shout Jiriki’s name, but his throat caught; all that came out
was a strangled grunt. The Sitha turned around. His amber eyes were bright.
He climbed to his feet beside the body of his comrade, holding his long,
rune-carved witchwood sword up before him.
   “Come, Old One!” Jiriki cried. “Come to me and taste Indreju, you
bastard child of Hidohebhi!”
   Simon grimaced as he dug toward the prince. No need to shout—the
dragon was coming of its own accord.
   “Get behind . . .” Jiriki started to say as Simon reached him, then the
Sitha abruptly pitched forward; the snow beneath him had fallen away.
Jiriki skidded backward toward the valley’s edge and the empty distance
beyond. Desperately, he reached out to grab at the snow. He stopped,
clinging, his feet dangling over nothingness. An’nai, a bloodied tangle, lay
undisturbed a cubit away.
   “Jiriki . . . !” Simon stopped. There was a noise like thunder behind. He
whirled to see the vast white bulk of Igjarjuk bearing down, head flailing
from side to side with the motion of the driving legs. Diving to one side,
away from Jiriki and An’nai, he rolled and came up on his feet. The blue
saucer-eyes tracked him, and the creature, now only a hundred paces away,
swerved to follow.
   Simon realized he was still carrying Thorn. He lifted it up; it was
suddenly light as a willow-wand, and seemed to sing in his hands, like a
wind-sawed rope. He glanced back over his shoulder: a few paces of ground
was all, then empty air. One of the distant peaks hovered in the swirling
mists across the chasm—white, quiet, serene.
   Usires save me, he wondered, why doesn’t the dragon make a sound? His
mind seemed to float loose inside his body. One hand stole up to
Miriamele’s scarf at his throat, and then he grasped the silver-wrapped hilt
once more. Igjarjuk’s head loomed, the gullet a black pit, the eye a blue
lantern. The world seemed constructed of silence.
   What should he shout at the last?
   He remembered what Jiriki had once said of mortals, even as the frosty
musk of the dragon blew down on him, a stench like sour cold earth and
wet stones.
   “Here I am!” he cried, and brought Thorn whistling toward the baleful
eye. “I am . . . Simon!”
   Something caught at the blade, and a gout of black blood spat at him,
burning like fire, like ice, searing his face even as a great white something
crashed through and carried him down into darkness.