
                          The Harrowing




The robin, orange breast glinting like a fading ember, lighted on one
of the elm’s low branches. He turned his head slowly from side to side
surveying the herb garden, and chirped impatiently, as if displeased to find
everything in such poor order.
    Josua watched him fly away, dipping over the garden wall, then arching
sharply upward to speed past the battlements of the inner keep. Within a
moment he was a speck of black against the bright gray dawn.
    “The first robin I have seen in a very long time. Perhaps it is a hopeful
sign in this dark Yuven.”
    The prince turned, surprised, to see Jarnauga standing on the path, eyes
fixed on the spot where the bird had disappeared. The old man, apparently
unmindful of the cold, wore only breeches and a thin shirt; his white feet
were bare.
    “Good morningtide, Jarnauga,” Josua said, pulling the neck of his cloak a
little tighter, as if the Rimmersman’s unsusceptibility increased his own
chill. “What brings you out to the garden so early?”
    “This old body needs very little sleep, Prince Josua,” he smiled. “And I
might ask you the same in turn, but I think I know the answer.”
    Josua nodded morosely. “I have not slept well since I first entered my
brother’s dungeons. While my comfort has improved since then, worry has
taken the place of hanging in chains as a denier of rest.”
    “There are many kinds of imprisonment,” Jarnauga nodded.
   They walked quietly for a while through the maze of walkways. The
garden was the lady Vorzheva’s onetime pride, set out to her meticulous
guidelines—for a girl born in a wagon, the prince’s courtiers whispered, she
was certainly a stickler for elegance—but had now been allowed to
deteriorate due to poor weather, as well as an abundance of more pressing
concerns.
   “Something is amiss, Jarnauga,” Josua said at last. “I can sense it. I can
almost feel it, as a fisherman feels the weather. What is my brother doing?”
   “It seems to me he is doing his best to kill us all,” the old man replied, a
tight grin creasing his leathery face. “Is that what is ‘amiss’?”
   “No,” the prince said seriously. “No. That is just the problem. We have
held him off for a month, with bitter losses—Baron Ordmaer, Sir
Grimstede, Wuldorcene of Caldsae, as well as hundreds of stout yeomen—
but it has been nearly a fortnight since he has mounted a serious assault.
The attacks have been . . . cursory. He is going through the motions of a
siege. Why?” He sat down on a low bench, and Jarnauga sat beside him.
“Why?” he repeated.
   “A siege is not always won by force of arms. Perhaps he is planning to
starve us out.”
   “But then why bother to attack at all? We have inflicted terrible losses on
them. Why not just wait? It is as though he seeks only to keep us inside, and
himself outside. What is Elias doing?”
   The old man shrugged. “As I have told you: I can see much, but the
insides of men’s hearts are beyond my vision. We have survived so far. Let
us be thankful.”
   “I am. But I know my brother. He is not the type to sit patiently and wait.
There is something in the wind, some plan . . .” He trailed off into silence
and sat staring at an overgrown bed of mockfoil. The flowers had never
opened, and weeds stood insolently among the twining stems like carrion-
eaters mingling with a dying herd.
   “He could have been a magnificent king, you know,” Josua said
suddenly, as if in answer to some unspoken question. “There was a time
when he was just strong, and not a bully. That is to say, he was sometimes
cruel when we were younger, but it was only that innocent sort of cruelty
that big boys show to the smaller ones. He even taught me some things—
swordplay, wrestling. I never taught him anything. He was not very
interested in the things I knew about.”
   The prince smiled sadly, and for a moment a child’s fragile look seemed
to shine through his close-pared features.
   “We might even have been friends . . .” The prince knitted his long
fingers and blew warm breath into them. “If only Hylissa had lived.”
   “Miriamele’s mother?” Jarnauga asked quietly.
   “She was very beautiful—southern, you know—black hair, white teeth.
She was very shy, but when she smiled it was as though a lamp had been lit.
And she loved my brother—as best she could. But he frightened her: so
loud, so big. And she was very small . . . slim like a willow, jumped if one
only touched her shoulder . . .”
   The prince said no more, but sat lost in thought. Watery sunshine broke
through the clouds on the horizon, bringing a little color to the drab garden.
   “You sound as though you thought much of her,” the old man said gently.
   “Oh, I loved her.” Josua’s voice was matter-of-fact, his eyes still firmly
fixed on the tangled mockfoil. “I burned for love of her. I prayed to God to
take the love away, even though I knew that I would be but a husk, the
living core of me scooped out. Not that my prayer did any good. And I
think she loved me, too; I was her only friend, she often said. No one else
knew her as I did.”
   “Did Elias suspect?”
   “Of course. He suspected anyone who as much as stood near her at court
pageants, and I was with her constantly. But always honorably,” he added
hurriedly, then stopped. “Why should I be so earnest about that, even now?
Usires forgive me, I wish we had betrayed him!” Josua’s teeth were
clenched. “I wish she were my dead lover, instead of only my brother’s
dead wife.” He stared accusingly at the knob of scarred flesh protruding
from his right sleeve. “Her death lies on my conscience like a great stone—
it was my fault! My God, we are a haunted family.”
   He broke off at the clatter of footsteps on the path.
   “Prince Josua! Prince Josua, where are you?”
   “Here,” the prince called distractedly, and a moment later one of his
guards stumbled into view around a hedge-wall.
   “My prince,” he gasped, bending a knee, “Sir Deornoth says you must
come at once!”
   “Are they onto the walls again?” Josua asked, standing and shaking dew
from his wool cloak. His voice still sounded distant.
   “No, sire,” the guard said, his mustached mouth opening and closing in
excitement as though he were a whiskered fish. “It’s your brother—I mean
the King, sire. He’s pulling back. The siege is ending.”
   The prince gave Jarnauga a puzzled, worried glance as they hurried up
the path behind the excited guard.

                                    •••

   “The High King has given over!” Deornoth shouted as Josua made his
way up the steps, cloak billowing in the wind. “See! He turns tail and runs!”
   Deornoth turned and gave Isorn a comradely smack on the shoulder. The
duke’s son grinned, but Einskaldir beside him glared fiercely at the young
Erkynlander, lest he should think to try anything so foolish on him.
   “What now, what?” Josua said, pushing up beside Deornoth on the
sagging curtain wall. Directly below them lay the shattered ruins of a
miner’s box, evidence of a futile attempt to drop the curtain wall by
tunneling beneath it. The wall had dipped a few feet, but held: Dendinis had
built for the ages. The miners, even as they had set fire to the wooden
pillars shoring their tunnel, had been felled by the few stones they had
themselves shaken loose.
   In the distance lay Elias’ camp, an anthill of scurrying activity. The
remaining siege-engines had been toppled and shattered so that they would
benefit no one else; the rows and rows of tents had vanished, as if swept up
and carried away by gale winds. Thin sounds—the distant cry of drovers,
the crack of whips—floated up as the High King’s wagons were loaded.
   “He is retreating!” Deornoth said happily. “We have done it!”
   Josua shook his head. “Why? Why should he? We have whittled away a
bare fraction of his troops.”
   “Perhaps he realizes now how strong Naglimund is,” Isorn said,
squinting.
   “Then why not wait us out?” the prince demanded. “Aedon! What goes
on here? I can believe Elias himself might go back to the Hayholt—but why
not leave even a token siege in place?”
   “To lure us out,” Einskaldir said quietly. “Onto open ground.” Scowling,
he rubbed a rough thumb over the blade of his knife.
   “It could be,” the prince said, “but he should know me better.”
   “Josua . . .” Jarnauga was looking out beyond the decamping army, into
the morning haze cloaking the northern horizon. “There are strange clouds
away to the north.”
   The others stared, but could see nothing but the dim beginnings of the
Frostmarch.
   “What sort of clouds?” the prince asked at last.
   “Storm clouds. Very strange. Like none I have ever seen south of the
mountains.”




   The prince stood at the window listening to the murmur of the trailing
wind, his forehead pressed against the cold stone frame. The spare
courtyard below was moonpainted, and the trees swayed.
   Vorzheva extended a white arm from beneath the fur coverlet.
   “Josua, what is it? It is cold. Shut the window, and come back to your
bed.”
   He did not turn. “The wind goes everywhere,” he said quietly. “There is
no keeping it out, and there is no staying it when it wishes to depart.”
   “It is too late at night for your riddles, Josua,” she said, yawning and
running fingers through her inky hair, so that it spread upon the sheet like
black wings.
   “It is perhaps too late for many things,” he replied, and went to sit on the
bed beside her. His hand gently stroked her long neck, but still he looked
out toward the window. “I am sorry, Vorzheva. I am . . . confusing, I know. I
have never been the right man—not for my tutors, not for my brother, or my
father . . . and not for you. I sometimes wonder if I was born out of my
time.” He lifted his finger to trace her cheek, and her warm breath was on
his hand. “When I see the world as it has been presented to me, I feel only a
deep loneliness.”
   “Lonely!?” Vorzheva sat up. The fur robe fell away; her smooth ivory
skin was banded in moonlight. “By my clan, Josua, you are a cruel man!
Still you punish me for my mistake in trying to help the princess. How can
you share my bed and call yourself lonely? Go away, you moping boy, go
sleep with one of those cold northern girls, or in some monk’s den. Go
then!”
   She struck at him, and he caught her arm. She was strong despite her
slenderness, and she slapped him twice with her other hand before he could
roll atop her and pinion her.
   “Peace, lady, peace!” he said, and then laughed, although his face stung.
Vorzheva scowled and struggled. “You are right,” he said. “I have done you
insult, and I ask your apology. I sue for peace.” He leaned down and kissed
her on the neck, and then again on her anger-reddened cheek.
   “Come nearer and I will bite you,” she hissed. Her body trembled against
his. “I was frightened for you when you went to battle, Josua. I thought you
would die.”
   “I was no less frightened, my lady. There is much in the world to fear.”
   “And now you feel you are alone.”
   “One can be lonely,” the prince said, offering his lip to be bitten, “in the
highest and best of company.”
   Her arm, now free, closed around his neck to pull him closer. The
moonlight silvered their intertwined limbs.




   Josua dropped his bone spoon back into the soup bowl, and angrily
watched the small eddies wash back and forth across the surface. The
dining hall hummed with the rush of many voices.
   “I cannot eat. I must know!”
   Vorzheva, eating in silence, but with her usual good appetite, shot him a
disquieted glance down the table.
   “Whatever is happening, my prince,” Deornoth said shyly, “you must
have your strength.”
   “You will need it to speak to your people, Prince Josua,” Isorn
commented around a mouthful of bread. “They are upset and puzzled. The
king is gone. Why no celebration?”
   “You know damnably well why not!” Josua snapped, then raised his
hand to his temple in pain. “Surely you can see it is some trap—that Elias
would not give up so easily?”
   “I suppose,” said Isorn, but did not seem convinced. “That does not mean
the people who have been crowded in the inner keep like cattle—” he
gestured with a large hand at the milling folks pressed around the prince’s
table on all sides, most sitting on the floor or against the walls of the dining
hall, chairs too precious for any but the noblest,—“that they will
understand. Take it from one who spent a hellish winter snowbound in
Elvritshalla.” Isorn bit off another great hunk of bread.
   Josua sighed and turned to Jarnauga. The old man, his serpent tattoos
strangely mobile in the lanternlight, was deep in conversation with Father
Strangyeard.
   “Jarnauga,” the prince said quietly. “You said you wished to talk to me of
a dream you had.”
   The old Rimmersgarder excused himself from the priest. “Yes, Josua,” he
answered, leaning close, “but perhaps we should wait until we might speak
privately.” He cocked an ear to the clamor of the dining hall. “Then again,
no one could eavesdrop in here even if he sat under your chair.” He showed
a frosty smile.
   “I have had dreams again,” he said at last, eyes jewel-bright beneath his
brows. “I have no power to summon them, but they sometimes come
unbidden. Something has happened to the company sent to Urmsheim.”
   “Something?” Josua’s face was shadowed, slack.
   “I only dreamed,” Jarnauga said defensively, “but I felt a great rupture—
pain and terror—and I felt the boy Simon calling out . . . calling out in fear
and anger . . . and something else . . .”
   “Could what has happened to them be the cause of the storm you saw
this morning?” the prince asked leadenly, as if hearing bad news long
expected.
   “I do not think so. Urmsheim is in a range farther east, behind Drorshull
lake and across the Wastes.”
   “Are they alive?”
   “I have no way of knowing. It was a dream, and a short, strange one at
that.”
                                    •••

   They walked later in silence on the high castle walls. The wind had
rolled the clouds away, and the moon turned the deserted town below to
bone and parchment.
   Staring out into the black northern sky, Josua exhaled steamily. “So even
the faint hope of Thorn is gone.”
   “I did not say so.”
   “You had no need. And I suppose you and Strangyeard are no nearer to
discovering what has become of Fingil’s sword Minneyar?”
   “Sadly, no.”
   “Then what more needs to be done to assure our downfall. God has
played a cruel joke on . . .” Josua broke off as the old man clenched his arm.
   “Prince Josua,” he said, gazing squint-eyed at the horizon, “you convince
me never to taunt the gods, even those who are not your own.” He sounded
shaken, old for the first time.
   “What do you mean?”
   “You asked what more could be done to us?” The old man snorted in
bitter humor. “The storm clouds, that black storm in the north? It is moving
toward us—and very swiftly, too.”




   Young Ostrael of Runchester stood shivering on the curtain wall and
reflected on what his father had once said.
   “’Tis good t’serve thy prince. Tha’ll see a bit o’ th’ world as soldier,
boy.” Firsfram had told him, folding his leathery farmer’s hand over his
son’s shoulder, even as his mother, red-eyed, silently watched. “Maybe an’
tha’ll go t’Southern Islands, or down Nabban-way, an’ get thasel’ out o’
this be-damned Frostmarch wind.”
   His father was gone now. He’d disappeared last winter, dragged off by
wolves during that terrible cold Decander . . . wolves or something else, for
no trace of him was ever found. And Firsfram’s son, the southern life still
untasted, stood on a wall in the freezing wind, and felt the cold penetrating
his very heart.
   Ostrael’s mother and sisters huddled below, with hundreds of the other
dispossessed, in makeshift barracks inside Naglimund’s heavy stone keep.
The walls of the keep provided far better shelter from the wind than did
Ostrael’s high perch, but even stone walls, no matter how thick, could not
keep out the dreadful music of the approaching storm.
   His eyes were drawn, fearfully but irresistibly, up to the dark blot roiling
on the horizon, spreading as it came like gray ink poured into water. It was
a smear, a blank space, as if something had rubbed away the stuff of reality.
It was a spot where the very sky seemed to tilt, funneling the clouds
downward into a slow-swirling mass like the tail of a whirlpool. From time
to time bright prickles of lightning leaped across the top of the storm. And
always, always, there was the horrible sound of drumming, distant as a
spatter of rain on a thick roof, insistent as the chattering of Ostrael’s teeth.
   The hot air and fabled sun-dotted hills of Nabban seemed more and more
to Firsfram’s son like the Book-stories told by priests, a bit of imaginary
comfort to drag one along, to hide the terror of inescapable death.
   The storm came on, throbbing with drums like a hive of wasps.




   Deornoth’s lantern guttered in the stiff wind and nearly flickered out; he
shielded it with his cloak until the flame grew steady once more. Beside
him, Isorn Isgrimnurson stared out into the cold, lightning-scratched
darkness.
   “God’s Tree! It’s black as night,” Deornoth groaned. “Just past noon, yet
I can scarcely see at all.”
   Isorn’s mouth opened, a dark slash in his pale, lantern-lit face, but no
sound came out. His jaw worked.
   “All will be well,” Deornoth said, frightened himself by the strong young
Rimmersman’s fear. “’Tis just a storm—some evil, petty trick of
Pryrates’ . . .” Even as he said it he felt sure it was a lie. The black clouds
that masked the sun, dragging night to the very gates of Naglimund,
brought with them a dread that pressed on his very being like a weight, like
the stone lid of a casket. What magician’s summoning was this, what mere
wizardry, that could push an icy spear of horror right into his very guts?
   The storm trudged toward them, a clot of darkness spreading far beyond
the castle walls on either side, looming above the highest battlements, shot
through with the blue-white flicker of lightning. The huddled town and
countryside leaped into relief for a moment, then vanished again in the
murk. The throbbing of drumbeats echoed against the curtain wall.
   As the lightning flashed once more, momentarily counterfeiting the
stolen daylight, Deornoth saw something that caused him to turn and grasp
Isorn’s broad arm so tightly the Rimmersman winced.
   “Get the prince,” Deornoth’s voice was hollow.
   Isorn looked up, his superstitious fear of the storm overcome by the
strangeness of Deornoth’s manner. The young knight’s face had gone slack,
empty like a meal bag, even as his fingernails drew an unnoticed rill of
blood from Isorn’s arm.
   “What . . . what is it?”
   “Get Prince Josua,” Deornoth repeated. “Go!”
   The Rimmersman, with a backward glance at his friend, made the sign of
the Tree and staggered along the battlement toward the stairs.
   Numb, heavy as lead, Deornoth stood and wished that he had been killed
at Bullback Hill—even that he had died in disgrace—rather than see what
was before him.

                                    •••

   When Isorn returned with the prince and Jarnauga, Deornoth was still
staring. There was no need to ask what he saw, for the lightning illuminated
all.
   A great army had come to Naglimund. Within the storm’s swirling mist
stood a vast forest of bristling spears. A galaxy of bright eyes gleamed in
the darkness. The drums rolled again, like thunder, and the storm settled
over castle and town, a great, billowing tent of rain and black clouds and
freezing fog.
   The eyes gazed up at the walls—thousands of shining eyes, all full of
fierce anticipation. White hair streamed in the wind, narrow white faces
turned upward in their dark helms, staring at the walls of Naglimund.
Speartips glinted blue in another flash of skyfire. The invaders peered
silently upward like an army of ghosts, pale as blindfish, ethereal as
moonsheen. The drums pulsed. In the mist, other, longer shadows stalked:
giant shapes cloaked in armor, carrying great gnarled clubs. The drums
pulsed again, then fell silent.
   “Merciful Aedon, give me rest,” Isorn prayed. “In Your arms will I sleep,
upon Thy bosom . . .”
   “Who are they, Josua?” Deornoth asked quietly, as if merely curious.
   “The White Foxes—the Norns,” the prince answered. “They are Elias’
reinforcements.” He lifted his hand wearily, as if to block the spectral legion
from his sight. “They are the Storm King’s children.”




   “Your Eminence, please!” Father Strangyeard tugged at the old man’s
arm, gently at first, then with increasing force. The old man clung to the
bench like a whelk, a small shape in the darkness of the herb garden.
   “We must pray, Strangyeard,” Bishop Anodis repeated stubbornly.
   “Get you down on your knees.”
   The throbbing, percussive sound of the storm intensified. The archive-
master felt a panicky urge to run—somewhere, anywhere.
   “This is . . . it is no natural twilight, Bishop. You must come inside, now.
Please.”
   “I knew I should not have stayed. I told Prince Josua not to resist the
rightful king,” Anodis added plaintively. “God is angry with us. We must
pray to be shown the rightful path—we must remember His martyrdom on
the Tree . . .” He waved his hand convulsively, as though swatting at flies.
   “This? This is not God’s doing,” Strangyeard replied, a scowl on his
usually pleasant face. “This is the work of your ‘rightful king’—he and his
pet warlock.”
   The bishop paid him no heed. “Blessed Usires,” he babbled, crawling
away from the priest toward the shadowy tangle of the mockfoil bed.
   “Your humble supplicants repent of their sins. We have thwarted Your
will, and in doing so have drawn Your just wrath . . .”
   “Bishop Anodis!” cried Strangyeard in nervous exasperation, taking a
step to follow him, then halting in surprise. A dense, swirling cold seemed
to descend over the garden. A moment later, as the archive-master
shuddered in the deepening chill, the sound of drumming stopped.
    “Something . . .” A frosty wind flapped Strangyeard’s hood in his face.
    “O, yea, we have sinned m-m-mightily in our haughtiness, we puny
men!” Anodis sang out, rattling through the mockfoil. “We p-pray . . .
we . . . p-p-pray . . . ?” he trailed off, his voice rising curiously.
    “Bishop?”
    There was a shudder of movement in the depth of the mockfoil.
Strangyeard saw the old man’s face appear, mouth agape. Something
seemed to catch at him; dirt began to gout up all around, further obscuring
events in the shadowy vegetation. The bishop screamed, a thin, keening
sound.
    “Anodis!” Strangyeard shouted, plunging into the mockfoil. “Bishop!”
    The screaming stopped. Strangyeard halted a moment later, standing over
the bishop’s huddled form. Slowly, as if the old man were revealing the end
of some elaborate trick, the bishop rolled to one side.
    Part of his face was a wash of red blood. A black head sat on the ground
beside him, like a doll thrown aside by a forgetful child. The head, chewing
rapidly, turned grinning toward Strangyeard. Its tiny eyes were white as
bleached currants, the scraggly whiskers shiny with the bishop’s blood. As
it reached a long-fingered hand out of the hole to pull the bishop closer, two
more heads popped from the ground on either side. The archive-master took
a step backward. A scream lodged in his throat like a stone. The ground
convulsed again—here, there, on all sides. Thin black hands wriggling like
mole-snouts pushed up through the soil.
    Strangyeard stumbled backward and fell, dragging himself toward the
path, certain that any moment a clammy hand would close on his ankle. His
mouth was stretched wide in a rictus of fear, but no sound came. He had lost
his sandals in the undergrowth, and he lurched up the path toward the
chapel on noiseless bare feet. The world seemed damply blanketed in
silence; it choked him, and squeezed at his heart. Even the crash of the
chapel door behind him seemed muffled. As he fumbled the bolt home a
curtain of featureless gray came down before his eyes, and he fell into it
gratefully, like a soft bed.
   The flames of countless torches now rose among the Norns like blossoms
in a poppy field, throwing the horridly beautiful faces into scarlet half-
silhouette, adding grotesquely to the stature of the battle-garbed Hunën
lurking behind. Soldiers clambered up onto the castle walls, only to stare
down in shocked silence.
   Five ghostly figures on horses pale as spider silk rode out into the open
space before the curtain wall. The torchlight played on their hooded white
cloaks, and the red pyramid of Stormspike glimmered and pulsed on their
long rectangular shields. Fear seemed to surround these hooded ones like a
cloud, reaching out into the hearts of all who saw them. The watchers on
the walls felt a terrible, helpless weakness fall upon them.
   The lead horseman lifted his spear; the four behind him did the same.
The drums sounded three times.
   “Where is the master of Ujin e-d’a Sikhunae—The Snare That Traps the
Hunter?” The first horseman’s voice was a mocking, echoing moan, like
wind blowing down a long canyon. “Where is the master of the House of a
Thousand Nails?”
   The hovering storm breathed for long moments before the reply came.
   “I am here.” Josua stepped forward, a slender shadow atop the gatehouse.
“What does such a strange band of travelers want at my door?” His voice
was calm, but there was in it a faint quaver.
   “Why . . . we have come to see how the nails have rusted, while we have
grown strong.” The words came slowly, forced out in a hiss of air, as if the
horseman was unused to speech. “We have come, mortal, to have a little of
our own back. This time it is man-blood that will spill on the soil of Osten
Ard. We have come to pull your house down about your ears.”
   The implacable power and hatred of the hollow voice was such that
many of the soldiers cried out and began to scramble down the walls back
into the castle below. As Josua stood on the gate, unspeaking, a cry shrilled
above the groans and frightened whispers of the Naglimunders.
   “Diggers! There are diggers within the walls!”
   The prince turned at a movement close by. It was Deornoth, climbing up
on unsteady legs to stand at his side.
   “The gardens of the keep are full of Bukken,” the young knight said. His
eyes were wide as he looked down on the white horsemen.
   The prince took a step forward. “You speak as though of revenge,” he
shouted to the pale multitude below. “But that is a lie! You come at the
bidding of the High King Elias—a mortal. You serve a mortal, as a tickbird
does a cockindrill. Come then. Do your worst! You will find that not all the
nails of Naglimund are rusted, and that there is iron here that can still deal
death to the Sithi!”
   A ragged cheer went up from those soldiers still atop the walls. The first
rider spurred his horse forward a pace.
   “We are the Red Hand!” His voice was cold as the grave. “We serve no
one but Ineluki, the Lord of Storms. Our reasons are our own—as your
death will be your own!”
   He waved his spear above his head, and the drums burst out again. Shrill
horns wailed.
   “Bring up those wagons!” Josua shouted from the gatehouse roof. “Block
the way! They will try and throw down the gate!”
   But instead of bringing up a ram to try and shatter the heavy steel and
stout timbers of the gate, the Norns stood silent, watching as the five
horsemen rode unhurriedly forward. One of the guards atop the wall loosed
an arrow. It was followed by a score of others, but if they struck the riders it
was only to pass through them: the pale horsemen faltered not a step.
   The drums beat furiously, the pipes and strange trumpets groaned and
shrieked. Dismounting, the riders appeared and disappeared in flashes of
lightning as they strode the last few steps to the gate.
   With dreadful deliberateness, the leader reached up to pull open his
hooded cloak. A scarlet light seemed to spill forth. As he tore it away, it
was as though he turned inside-out; suddenly he was all formlessness and
smoldering red glare. The others did the same. Five beings of shifting,
flickering lines grew and stood revealed—larger than before, each tall as
two men, faceless, billowing like burning vermilion silk.
   A black mouth opened in the leader’s eyeless face as he lifted his arms to
the gate and placed his burning hands against it.
   “Death!” he bellowed, and his voice seemed to shake the very
fundament of the walls. The iron hinges began to glow a dull orange.
    “Hei ma’akajao-zha!” The massive spars blackened and smoked. Josua,
tugging frantically at the dumbstruck Deornoth’s arm, leaped down to the
top of the wall.
    “T’si anh pra INELUKI!”
    As the prince’s soldiers dove shrieking down the staircases there was a
burst of light, a deafening crack louder than drums or thunder, and the
mighty gate burst into steaming, sparkling flinders. The shards hissed down
in a deadly rain as the wall collapsed on either side, crushing men beneath it
even as they tried to flee.
    Armored Norns leaped into the smoking gap in the walls. Some lifted
long tubes of wood or bone, touching them at the end with flaming brands.
Horrible gouts of fire leaped out of the pipes, turning fleeing soldiers into
jigging, wailing torches. Great dark shapes pushed through the rubble: the
Hunën, swinging long iron-studded clubs in their shaggy hands, howling
like maddened bears as they crushed all in their path. Shattered bodies flew
before them like ninepins.
    Some of the soldiers, courageously resisting the choking fear, turned to
fight. A giant went down with two spears in its guts, but a moment later the
spearmen were dead, feathered with white-fletched Norn arrows. The pallid
Norns were pushing through the fuming breach in the wall like maggots,
shouting as they came.
    Deornoth pulled a stumbling Josua toward the inner keep. The prince’s
soot-blackened face was wet with tears and blood.
    “Elias has sown the dragon’s teeth,” Josua choked as Deornoth pulled
him past a gurgling soldier. Deornoth thought he recognized the young
pikeman Ostrael, who had stood sentry at the king’s parley, buried beneath
the squirming black bodies of a score of diggers. “My brother has planted
seeds for the death of all men!” Josua railed. “He is mad!”
    Before Deornoth could reply—and what reply, he briefly wondered,
could he possibly make?—two Norn soldiers, eyes fire-gleaming within the
slits of their helms, rounded the corner of the inner keep dragging a
shrieking girl. Spotting Deornoth, one hissed something, then reached down
with his dark, slender sword and dragged the blade across the girl’s throat.
She dropped twitching to the earth behind them.
    Deornoth felt the bile rising in his throat as he threw himself forward,
sword upraised. The prince was there even before him, Naidel flickering
like the lightning that etched the black sky—afternoon, it was only
afternoon!
   This is the hour at last, then, he thought wildly. Steel rang on polished
witchwood. There must be honor, the thought was desperate. Even if there is
no one to see it . . . God will see . . .
   The white faces, hateful and hating, swam before his sweat-stinging
eyes.




   No dream of Hell, no woodcut in any of his many books, no warning of
any of his Aedonite teachers could prepare Father Strangyeard for the
howling inferno Naglimund had become. Lightning sizzled across the sky,
thunder roared, and the voices of slayers and victims alike rose to the
heavens like the babble of the damned. Despite the wind and driving rains,
fires were leaping up everywhere in the darkness, killing many who thought
to hide behind stout doors from the madness outside.
   Limping along in the shadows of the inner hallways, he saw Norns
clambering in through the shattered windows of the chapel, and stood
helplessly by while they caught poor Brother Eglaf, who was kneeling in
prayer before the altar. Strangyeard could no more stay to watch the horror
to come than he could do anything to help his fellow man of God. Slipping
outside with his eyes full of blinding tears and his heart heavy as lead in his
breast, he headed for the inner keep and the prince’s rooms.
   Hiding in the black depths of a hedge he saw stout Ethelferth of Tinsett
and two of his guardsmen smashed to a red pulp beneath the cudgel of a
barking giant.
   He watched trembling as Lord Constable Eadgram bled to death standing
upright, swarmed by squeaking diggers.
   He saw one of the court ladies ripped limb from limb by another of the
shaggy Hunën while another woman crouched on the ground nearby, face
blank with madness.
   All through the shattered freehold these tragedies were mirrored a
thousandfold, a nightmare seemingly without end.
   Weeping out a prayer to Usires, certain that God’s face was turned away
from Naglimund’s death throes but praying nevertheless in desperate,
passionate reflex, he staggered around to the front of the inner keep. Two
scorched, unhelmeted knights stood there in a tangle of corpses, eyes
showing hunted-animal white. It was a long moment until he recognized
Deornoth and the prince, and another heart-freezing wait before he could
convince them to follow him.

                                    •••

   It was quieter in the residence’s maze of hallways. The Norns had broken
in; a few bodies lay crumpled against the walls or splayed out on the stone
flags, but most of the people had fled toward the chapel or the dining hall,
and the Norns had not stayed to search. That would come later.
   Isorn unbarred the door at Josua’s shouted command. Isgrimnur’s son,
with Einskaldir and a handful of Erkynlander and Rimmersman soldiers,
stood guard over the Lady Vorzheva and the Duchess Gutrun. A few others
courtiers were huddled there as well, Towser and the harper Sangfugol
among them.
   While the prince pulled himself coldly from Vorzheva’s weeping
embrace, Strangyeard discovered Jarnauga lying on a pallet in the corner; a
blood-soaked bandage was twined haphazardly around his head.
   “The roof of the library fell,” the old Rimmersman said, smiling bitterly.
“The flames, I fear, have taken nearly all.”
   For Father Strangyeard this was, in some way, the worst blow of all. He
burst out in fresh weeping, tears even trickling down from beneath his eye
patch.
   “Worse . . . it could be worse,” he gulped finally. “You might have gone
with them, my friend.”
   Jarnauga shook his white head and winced. “No. Not quite yet. Soon,
though. I did save one thing.” He pulled from out of his robe the battered
parchment of Morgenes’ manuscript, the top page now ribboned with blood.
“Carry it safe. It will be of some use still, I hope.”
   Strangyeard took it carefully, tying it with a cord from Josua’s table and
slipping it into the inner pocket of his cassock. “Can you stand?” he asked
Jarnauga.
   The old man nodded carefully, and the priest helped him to his feet.
   “Prince Josua,” Strangyeard said, holding Jarnauga’s elbow. “I have
thought of something.”
   The prince turned from his urgent conferral with Deornoth and the others
to stare impatiently at the archive-master.
   “What is it?” His eyebrows singed away, Josua’s forehead seemed more
prominent than ever, a pale lunar bulge beneath his close-cropped hair. “Do
you wish me to build a new library?” The prince sagged wearily against the
wall as the clamor built outside. “I am sorry, Strangyeard. That was a
foolish thing to say. What has come to your mind?”
   “There is a way out.”
   Several of the dirt-streaked, desperate faces turned toward him.
   “What?” Josua asked, bending forward to stare intently. “Shall we march
out through the gate? I hear it has been opened for us.”
   Strangyeard’s sense of urgency gave him the strength to stare the prince
down. “There is a hidden passageway leading out of the guardroom to the
Eastern Gate,” he said. “I should know—you have had me staring at
Dendinis’ castle plans for months in preparation for the siege.” He thought
of the rolls of irreplaceable brown parchment, covered in the fading ink of
Dendinis’ careful notes, ashes now, charred in the rubble of the library. He
fought down more tears. “If . . . if we c-can get there we may escape up the
Stile into the Wealdhelm Hills.”
   “And from there what?” Towser asked querulously. “Starve in the hills?
Eaten by wolves in the Oldheart Forest?”
   “Would you rather be eaten here and now, by less pleasant things?”
Deornoth snapped. His heart had sped at the priest’s words; the faint return
of hope was almost too painful, but he would bear anything to get his prince
to safety.
   “We will have to fight our way out,” Isorn said. “Even now I can hear the
Norns filling the residence. We have women and some children.”
   Josua stared around the room at nearly a score of weary, frightened faces.
   “Better to die outside than to be burned alive here, I suppose,” he said at
last. He lifted his hand in a gesture of benediction or resignation. “Let us go
swiftly.”
   “One thing, Prince Josua.” Hearing him, the prince came to where the
priest was aiding struggling Jarnauga. “If we can make our way to the
Tunnel Gate,” Strangyeard said quietly, “we have still another problem to
solve. It was built for defense, not escape. It can be as easily opened as
closed from the inside.”
   Josua wiped ash from his brow. “You are saying that we must find some
way to block it behind us?”
   “If we are to have any hope of escape.”
   The prince sighed. A cut on his lip dripped blood onto his chin. “Let us
reach the gate at all, then we shall do what must be done.”

                                    •••

   They burst through the door in a pack, surprising a pair of Norns who
waited in the corridor. Einskaldir crashed his axe through the helmet of the
nearest, throwing sparks in the darkened hallway. Before the other could do
more than raise his short sword, he had been skewered between Isorn and
one of the Naglimund guardsmen. Deornoth and the prince quickly herded
the courtiers out.
   Much of the din of slaughter had died away. Only an occasional scream
of pain or rising chant of triumph floated through the empty hallways. Eye-
stinging smoke, licking flames, and the mocking songs of the Norns gave
the residence the look of some terrible underworld, some labyrinth on the
edge of the Great Pit.
   In the savaged ruins of the castle gardens they were set on by chittering
diggers. One of the soldiers fell dead with a jagged Bukken knife in his
back, and as the rest of the company fought off the others, one of
Vorzheva’s maidservants was dragged squealing down into a gash in the
black earth. Deornoth leaped forward to try and save her, impaling a
squirming, whistling black body on the end of his sword, but she was gone.
Only her delicate slipper lying in the rain-spattered mud showed she had
even existed.
   Two of the immense Hunën had discovered the wine cellars, and were
fighting drunkenly over the last barrel before the inner keep’s guardhouse,
clubbing and scratching each other in roaring fury. One giant’s arm hung
limp at his side, and the other had gotten such a terrible wound to his head
that a flap of skin hung free, and his face was a sheet of blood. Still they
tore at each other, snarling their incomprehensible language in the wreckage
of shattered casks and the crushed bodies of Naglimund’s defenders.
   Crouched in the mud at the edge of the gardens, Josua and Strangyeard
squinted against the driving rain.
   “The guardroom door is closed,” Josua said. “We might be able to get
across the open yard, but if it has been bolted from the inside we are
doomed. We would never burst it open in time.”
   Strangyeard shivered. “Even if we did, we would not then . . . not then be
able to bolt it behind us.”
   Josua looked at Deornoth, who said nothing.
   “Still,” the prince hissed, “it is what we came for. We shall run.”
   When they had formed up the small company, they set out at a stumbling
dash. The two Hunën, one of them with his great teeth fastened in his
fellow’s throat, were rolling on the ground, locked still in howling battle
like gods of the primordial past. Oblivious to the humans passing by, one of
them threw out a massive leg in a paroxysm of pain and knocked the harper
Sangfugol sprawling. Isorn and old Towser hurriedly turned back and
picked him up; as they did so a shrill, excited shout came from across the
courtyard.
   A dozen Norns, two of them on tall white horses, turned at their fellow’s
call. Seeing the prince’s party they gave a great cry and spurred forward,
galloping past the now-senseless giants.
   Isorn reached the door and pulled. It sprang open, but even as the
terrified company began to push inside the first rider was upon them, a high
helm upon his head, a long spear poised in his hand.
   Dark-bearded Einskaldir dashed forward with a snarl like a cornered dog,
ducking the serpentine strike of the lance, then leaping and throwing
himself against the Norn’s side. He caught the Norn’s flapping cloak in his
hand and pushed away, tumbling to the ground and bringing his enemy
down after him. The riderless horse skidded on the wet cobbles. Kneeling
over the fallen Norn, Einskaldir brought his axe down hard, then crashed it
down again. Blind to all around him, he would have been pierced by the
spear of the second Norn rider, but Deornoth hefted and threw the lid of a
broken barrel, knocking the rider off his horse and into one of the hedges.
The howling foot-troops were bearing down fast as Deornoth pulled the
foaming Einskaldir off the Norn’s hacked corpse.
   They drove through the door moments ahead of the attackers, and Isorn
and two of the other pursuers rammed it shut. Spears crashed against the
heavy wood; a moment later one of the Norns called out in a high-pitched,
clicking voice.
   “Axes!” Jarnauga said. “I know that much of the Hikeda’ya tongue. They
are going for axes.”
   “Strangyeard!” Josua shouted, “where is the damned passageway?”
   “It’s . . . it’s so dark,” the priest quavered. Indeed, the room was lit only
by the inconstant light of orange flames beginning to burn through the
roofbeams. Smoke was gathering beneath the low ceiling. “I . . . I think it is
on the south side . . .” he began. Einskaldir and several others sprang to the
wall and began pulling down the heavy arrases.
   “The door!” Einskaldir barked. “Locked,” he added a moment later.
   The keyhole in the heavy wooden door was empty. Josua stared for a
moment, even as a sliver of axe-blade crashed through the door from the
courtyard outside. “Break it down,” he said. “You others, pile what you can
before the other door.”
   In a matter of moments Einskaldir and Isorn had hacked the bolt right out
of the jamb, while Deornoth lifted an unlit torch to the smoldering ceiling.
An instant later the door was knocked off its hinges and they were through,
fleeing up the sloping corridor. Another piece splintered out of the door
behind them.

                                     •••

   They ran for several furlongs, the stronger helping the weaker. One of the
courtiers at last fell weeping to the ground, unable to go farther. Isorn went
to pick him up, but his mother Gutrun, herself staggeringly tired, waved
him off.
   “Leave him lie,” she said. “He can keep up.”
   Isorn looked hard at her, then shrugged. As they continued up the
slanting stone pathway, they heard the man struggle to his feet, cursing
them, and follow.
   Even as the doors loomed before them, swart and solid in the light of the
solitary torch, extending from the floor of the passageway to the roof, the
sound of pursuit came echoing up behind them. Fearing the worst, Josua
stretched out his hand to one of the iron rings and pulled. The door swung
inward with a soft groan of its hinges.
   “Usires be praised,” Isorn said.
   “Get the women and others through,” Josua ordered, and a moment later
two of the soldiers had led them well up the passageway beyond the mighty
doors.
   “Now we come to it,” Josua said. “Either we must find some way to seal
this door, or else we must leave enough men behind to slow our pursuers.”
   “I will stay,” Einskaldir growled. “I have tasted faërie-blood tonight. I
would not mind more.” He patted his hilt.
   “No. It is for me, and me alone.” Jarnauga coughed and sagged on
Strangyeard’s arm, then straightened. The tall priest turned to look at the
old man, and suddenly understood.
   “I am dying,” Jarnauga said. “I was not meant to leave Naglimund. I
always knew that. You need only leave me a sword.”
   “You have not the strength!” Einskaldir said angrily, as if disappointed.
   “I have enough to close this door,” the old man said gently. “See?” He
pointed to the great hinges. “They are wrought very fine. Once the door is
shut, a blade broken off in the hinge-crevice will balk the stoutest pursuer.
Go.”
   The prince turned as if to object; a clicking shout reverberated up the
passageway. “Very well,” he said softly. “God bless you, old man.”
   “No need,” Jarnauga said. He pulled something shiny from around his
neck and pressed it into Strangyeard’s hand. “Strange to make a friend at
the very last,” Jarnauga said. The priest’s eye filled with tears, and he kissed
the Rimmersman’s cheek.
   “My friend,” he whispered, and went through the open door.
   The last they saw was Jarnauga’s bright gaze catch the torchlight as he
put his shoulder to the door. It swung closed, damping the sounds of
pursuit. The bolts inside slid solidly into place.

                                     •••

   After climbing a long stairway they emerged at last into the windy, rain-
lashed evening. The storm had thinned, and as they stood on the naked
hillside below the wooded Stile they could see fire flickering in the ruins of
Naglimund below, and black, inhuman shapes dancing among the vaulting
flames.
   Josua stood and stared for a long while, sooty face streaked by the rain.
His small party huddled trembling behind him, waiting to take to the path
once more.
   The prince raised his left fist.
   “Elias!” he shouted, and the wind whipped the echoes away. “You have
brought death and worse to our father’s kingdom! You have raised an
ancient evil, and shattered the High King’s Ward! You have unhoused me,
and destroyed much that I loved.” He stopped and fought back tears. “Now
you are king no longer! I will take the crown from you. I will take it, I
swear!”
   Deornoth took his elbow and led him away from the pathway’s edge.
Josua’s subjects stood waiting for him, cold and frightened, homeless in the
wild Wealdhelm. He bowed his head for a moment, in weariness or prayer,
and led them into the darkness.