
                Blood and the Spinning World




The dragon’s black blood had spilled over him, burning like a fire.
In the instant of its touch he had felt his own life subdued. The dreadful
essence coursed through him, scalding away his spirit, and leaving only
dragon-life. It was as if he had himself become—in the failing moment
before darkness came—the Worm’s secret heart.

                                      •••

   Igjarjuk’s smolderingly slow and intricate life captured him. He spread;
he changed, and the changing was as painful as both death and birth.
   His bones became heavy, solid as stone and curvingly reptilian. His skin
hardened into gemlike scales, and he felt his pelt sliding on his back like a
mailshirt of diamonds.
   The dragon’s heartblood now moved powerfully in his breast, ponderous
as the movement of a dark star in the empty night, strong and hot as the
very forge-fires of the earth. His claws sank into the world’s stony skin, and
his age-old heart pulsed . . . and pulsed . . . and pulsed . . . He grew into the
brittle, ancient cleverness of the dragonfolk, feeling first the birth of his
long-lived race in the earth’s infant days, then the weight of uncountable
years pressing upon him, dark millennia rushing by like roiling waters. He
was one of the Eldest of all races, one of the cooling earth’s firstborn, and
he lay coiled beneath the world’s surface as the least of worms might lie
hidden in the rind of an apple . . .
   The old black blood raced through him. Still he grew, and he perceived
and named all things of the spinning world. Its skin, the earth’s skin,
became his own—the crawling surface on which all living things were born,
where they struggled and failed, surrendering at last to become a part of
him once more. Its bones were his bones, the rocky pillars on which all
things stood, and through which he felt every tremor of breathing life.
   He was Simon. Yet he was the serpent. And he was nevertheless the very
earth in its infinitude and detail. And still he grew, and growing, felt his
mortal life slipping away . . .
   In the sudden loneliness of his majesty, fearing that he would lose
everything, he reached out to touch those he had known. He could feel their
warm lives, sensing them like sparks in a great, windy darkness. So many
lives—so important, so small . . .

                                   •••

   He saw Rachel—bent, old. She sat on a stool in an empty room, holding
her gray head in her hands. When had she become so small? A broom lay at
her feet, an orderly mound of dust beside it. The castle room was fast
darkening.
   Prince Josua stood on a hillside, looking down. A faint flame-hued light
painted his grim face. He could see Josua’s doubt and pain; he tried to
reach out and give him reassurance, but these lives were only to see, not to
touch.
   A small brown man he did not know poled his flat boat up a stream.
Great trees dangled their branches in the water, and clouds of midges
hovered. The little man patted protectively at a sheaf of parchment tucked
into his belt. A breeze rattled the trailing branches, and the little man
smiled gratefully.
   A large man—Isgrimnur? Where was his beard?—paced on a weather-
warped pier and stared out at the darkening sky, at the wind-lashed ocean.
   A beautiful old man, his long white hair tangled, sat playing with a
crowd of half-naked children. His blue eyes were mild, distant, wrinkled in
a happy squint.
   Miriamele, hair close-cropped, looked out from the rail of a ship at the
heavy clouds massing on the horizon. The sails snapped and rippled above
her head. He wanted to watch her for a longer time, but the vision whirled
away like a falling leaf.
   A tall Hernystiri woman dressed in black kneeled before two cairns of
stones in a grove of slender birch trees, high on the side of a wind-swept
mountain.
   King Elias stared into the depth of a wine cup, eyes red-rimmed. Sorrow
lay across his knees. The gray sword was a wild thing feigning sleep . . .

                                   •••

   Morgenes suddenly appeared before him, crowned in flame; and the sight
drove an icy spear of pain even into his dragon’s heart. The old man was
holding a great book, and his lips moved in anguished, silent cries, as
though he shouted a warning . . . beware the false messenger . . .
beware . . .

                                   •••

   The faces slipped away, but for one last ghost.
   A boy, thin and awkward, made his way through dark tunnels beneath the
earth, crying and crawling through the labyrinth like a trapped insect.
Every detail, every twist and turn unwound tortuously before his eyes.
   The boy stood on a hillside beneath the moon, staring in horror at white-
faced figures and a gray sword, but a dark cloud covered the boy in shadow.
   The same boy, older now, stood before a great white tower. A golden light
flashed on his finger, although the boy stood in deep and darkening shadow.
Bells were tolling, and the roof had burst into flames . . .

                                   •••

   Darkness was engulfing him now, pulling him away toward other,
stranger places—but he did not wish to go on to those places. Not until he
remembered the name of that child, that gawky boy who labored in
ignorance. He would not go on; he would remember . . .
   The boy’s name was . . . the boy’s name was . . . Simon!
   Simon.
  And then his sight faded . . .




   “Seoman,” the voice said, quite loud now; he realized it had been calling
him for some time.
   He opened his eyes. The colors were so intense he quickly shut them,
blinded. Spinning wheels of silver and red danced before the darkness of his
closed lids.
   “Come, Seoman, come and rejoin your companions. There is need of you
here.”
   He unlidded halfway, letting himself grow used to the light. There were
now no colors at all—everything was white. He groaned, trying to move,
and felt a terrible weakness, as though some heavy thing pressed down on
him all around; at the same time he felt himself as transparent and fragile as
if he were spun from pure glass. Even with closed eyes he thought he could
feel light passing through him, filling him with a radiance that brought no
warmth.
   A shadow crossed his sensitive face, seeming almost to have tangible
weight. Something wet and cold touched his lips. He swallowed, felt a bite
of pain, coughed, and drank again. It seemed he could taste everywhere the
water had ever been—the icy peak, the swollen rain cloud, the stony
mountain sluice.
   He opened his eyes wider. All was indeed overwhelmingly white, except
for the golden face of Jiriki looming nearby. He was in a cave, the walls
pale with ash but for the traces of faint lines; furs and wooden carvings and
decorated bowls were stacked along the edge of the stone floor. Simon’s
heavy hands, numb yet strangely acute, clutched at the fur coverlet and
probed weakly at the wooden cot on which he lay. How . . . ?
   “I . . .” He coughed again.
   “You are sore, you are tired. That is expected.” The Sitha frowned, but
his luminous eyes did not change expression. “You have done a very
terrible thing, Simon, do you know? You have saved my life twice.”
   “Mmmmm.” His head was responding as slowly as his muscles. What
exactly had happened? There had been the mountain . . . the cave . . . and
the . . .
   “The dragon!” Simon said, choking, and tried to sit up. As the fur robe
slid down he felt the chill of the room in earnest. Light was leaking past a
skin hanging at the room’s far end. A wave of dizziness left him limp, and
set his head and face to throbbing. He sagged back.
   “Gone,” Jiriki said shortly. “Dead or not I do not know, but gone. When
you struck, it tumbled past you and down into the abyss. I could not mark
where it fell in the snows and ice of the great deeps. You wielded the sword
Thorn like a warrior true, Seoman Snowlock.”
   “I . . .” He took a shaky breath and tried again. Talking made his face
hurt. “I don’t think . . . it was me. Thorn . . . used me. It . . . wanted to be
saved, I think. That must sound foolish, but . . .”
   “No. I think you may be correct. Look.” Jiriki pointed to the cave wall a
few feet away. Thorn lay cushioned there on the prince’s cloak, black and
remote as the bottom of a well. Could such a thing have ever felt alive in his
hand? “It was easy enough to carry here,” Jiriki said, “perhaps this was a
direction it wished to go.”
   The Sitha’s words set in motion a slow wheel of thought in Simon’s
mind.
   The sword wanted to come here—but where is here? And how did we
get . . . Oh, Mother of God, the dragon...!
   “Jiriki!” he gasped, “the others! Where are the others?”
   The prince nodded gently. “Ah, yes. I had hoped to wait longer, but I see
I have no choice.” He closed his wide, bright eyes for a moment.
   “An’nai and Grimmric are dead. They have been buried on the mountain
Urmsheim.” He sighed, and made a complicated gesture with his hands.
“You do not know what it means to bury a mortal and a Sitha together,
Seoman. It has been seldom done, and never in five centuries. An’nai’s
deeds will live until world’s end in the Dance of Years, the annals of our
people, and Grimmric’s name will now live with his. They will lie forever
beneath the Uduntree.” Jiriki closed his eyes and sat for a silent moment.
“The others . . . well, they have all survived.”
   Simon felt a clutch at his heart, but pushed away thoughts of the fallen
pair for later. He stared at the ash-painted ceiling, and saw that the lines
were faint scribings of great serpents and long-tusked beasts, winding all
across the roof and walls. The blank eyes of the creatures troubled him:
when he looked too long, they seemed to move. He turned back to the Sitha.
   “Where’s Binabik?” he asked. “I want to speak to him. I had the
strangest dream . . . the strangest dream . . .”
   Before Jiriki could speak, Haestan poked his head in through the cave
mouth. “Th’king doesna want t’talk,” he said, then saw Simon. “Y’r up,
lad!” he crowed. “That’s fine!”
   “What king?” Simon asked, confused. “Not Elias, I hope?”
   “No, lad,” Haestan shook his head. “After . . . after what happened up on
the mountain, th’trolls found us. You were sleepin’ for some days. We’re on
Mintahoq, now—the troll-mountain.”
   “And Binabik is with his family?”
   “Not quite.” Haestan looked at Jiriki. The Sitha nodded. “Binabik—
Sludig, too—th’king’s holdin’ them for prisoners. Under sentence o’ death,
some say.”
   “What!? Prisoners?!” Simon exploded, then sagged back down as a band
of pain tightened cruelly around his head. “Why?”
   “Sludig because he is a hated Rimmersman,” Jiriki said. “Binabik, they
say, has committed some terrible crime against the troll-king. We do not
know yet what it is, Seoman Snowlock.”
   Simon shook his head in amazement. “This is madness. I’ve gone mad,
or I’m still dreaming.” He turned accusingly to Jiriki. “And why do you
keep calling me that name?”
   “Don’t . . .” Haestan began, but Jiriki ignored him, producing instead
from within his jacket the looking glass. Simon sat up and took it, the fine
carvings on its frame rough to his sensitive fingers. The wind howled
outside the cave, and cold air crept in below the door-cloth.
   Was all the world covered with ice, now? Would he never again escape
the winter?
   In other circumstances he would have been quite taken with the reddish
golden whiskers which were coming in thickly all over his face, but his
attention was captured by the long scar running up from his jaw, over his
cheek and past his left eye. The surrounding skin was livid and new-
looking. He touched it and winced, then slid his fingers up to his scalp.
   A long swath of his hair had turned as white as the Urmsheim snows.
  “You have been marked, Seoman.” Jiriki reached out and touched his
cheek with a long finger. “For better or for worse, you have been marked.”
  Simon let the mirror drop, and covered his face with his hands.