
              The Grasshopper and the King




On this day of days there was an unfamiliar stirring deep inside the
dozing heart of the Hayholt, in the castle’s bewildering warren of quiet
passages and overgrown, ivy-choked courtyards, in the monk’s holes and
damp, shadowed chambers. Courtiers and servants alike goggled and
whispered. Scullions exchanged significant glances across the washing tubs
in the steamy kitchen. Hushed conversations seemed to be taking place in
every hallway and dooryard of the great keep.
   It might have been the first day of spring, to judge from the air of
breathless anticipation, but the great calendar in Doctor Morgenes’ cluttered
chamber showed differently: the month was only Novander. Autumn was
holding the door, and Winter was trudging in.
   What made this a day different from all others was not a season but a
place—the Hayholt’s throne room. For three long years its doors had been
shut by the king’s order, and heavy draperies had cloaked the multicolored
windows. Even the cleaning servants had not been permitted to cross the
threshold, causing the Mistress of Chambermaids no end of personal
anguish. Three summers and three winters it had stood undisturbed. Today
it was no longer empty, and all the castle hummed with rumor.

                                    •••

  In truth, there was one person in the busy Hayholt whose attention was
not fixed on that long-untenanted room, one bee in the murmuring hive
whose solitary song was not in key with the greater droning. That one sat in
the heart of the Hedge Garden, in an alcove between the dull red stone of
the chapel and the leafless side of a skeletal hedge-lion, and thought he was
not missed. It had been an irritating day so far—the women all busy, with
scant time to answer questions; breakfast late, and cold into the bargain.
Confusing orders had been given to him, as usual, and no one had any time
to waste with any of his problems. . . .
   And that was also, he thought grumpily, quite predictable. If it hadn’t
been for his discovery of this huge, magnificent beetle—which had come
strolling across the garden, as self-satisfied as any prosperous villager—
then the entire afternoon would have been a waste of time.
   With a twig he widened the tiny road he had scraped in the dark, cold
earth beside the wall, but still the captive would not walk forward. He
tickled gently at its glossy carapace, but the stubborn beetle would not
budge. Frowning, he sucked at his upper lip.
   “Simon! Where in the name of holy Creation have you been!”
   The twig dropped from his nerveless fingers, as though an arrow had
pierced his heart. Slowly, he turned to look at the looming shape.
   “Nowhere . . .” Simon began to say, but even as the words passed his lips
a pair of bony fingers caught his ear and brought him sharply to his feet,
yelping in pain.
   “Don’t you dare ‘nowhere’ me, young layabout,” Rachel the Dragon,
Mistress of Chambermaids, barked full into his face—a juxtaposition made
possible only by Rachel’s tiptoed stance and the boy’s natural inclination to
slouch, for the head chambermaid lacked nearly a foot of Simon’s height.
   “Sorry, then, mistress, I’m sorry,” Simon muttered, noting with sadness
the beetle nosing toward a crack in the chapel wall and freedom.
   “‘Sorry’ is not going to get you by forever,” Rachel growled. “Every
single body in the house is at work a-getting things ready but you! And, bad
enough that is, but then I have to waste my valuable time trying to find you!
How can you be such a wicked boy, Simon, when you should be acting like
a man? How can you?”
   The boy, fourteen gangly years old and furiously embarrassed, said
nothing. Rachel stared at him.
   Sad enough, she thought, that red hair and those spots, but when he
squints his eyes all up that way and scowls—why, the child looks half-
witted!
   Simon, staring in turn at his captor, saw Rachel breathing heavily,
pluming the Novander air with puffs of vapor. She was shivering, too,
although whether from the cold or anger, Simon couldn’t tell. It didn’t
really matter. It just made him feel worse.
   She’s still waiting for an answer—how tired and cross she looks! He
curled himself into an even more pronounced slump and glared at his own
feet.
   “Well, you’ll just come with me, then. The good Lord knows I’ve got
things to keep an idle boy busy with. Don’t you know the king is up out of
his sickbed? That he’s gone to his throne room today? Are you deaf and
blind?” She grabbed his elbow and frog-marched him across the garden.
   “The King? King John?” Simon asked, surprised.
   “No, you ignorant boy, King Stone-in-the-Road! Of course King John!”
Rachel halted in her tracks to push a wisp of limp steel-gray hair back under
her bonnet. Her hand trembled. “There, I hope you’re happy,” she said.
“You’ve gotten me so flummoxed and upset that I’ve gone and been
disrespectful to the name of our good old King John. And him so sick and
all.” She snuffled loudly and then leaned over to deal Simon a stinging slap
on the fat part of his arm. “Just you come.”
   She stumped forward, wicked boy in tow.

                                      •••

    Simon had never known any other home but the ageless castle called
Hayholt, which meant High Keep. It was well named: Green Angel Tower,
its loftiest point, soared far above even the eldest and tallest of trees. If the
Angel herself, perched on the tower top, had dropped a stone from her
verdigrised hand it would have plummeted nearly two hundred cubits
before splashing into the brackish moat and troubling the sleep of the great
pikefish bobbing close above the centuried mud.
    The Hayholt was older by far than all the generations of Erkynlandish
peasants who had been born, labored, and died in the fields and villages
surrounding the great keep. The Erkynlanders were only the latest to claim
the castle—many others had called it their own, but none had been able to
make it wholly so. The outwall around the sprawling keep showed the work
of diverse hands and times: the rough-hewn rock and timber of the
Rimmersmen, the haphazard patching and strange carvings of the
Hernystiri, even the meticulous stonework of Nabbanai craftsmen. But
looming over all stood Green Angel Tower, erected by the undying Sithi
long before men had come to these lands, when all of Osten Ard had been
their dominion. The Sithi had been the first to build here, constructing their
primeval stronghold on the headlands overlooking the Kynslagh and the
river-road to the sea. They had called their castle Asu’a; if it had a true
name, this house of many masters, then Asu’a was that name.
   The Fair Folk had vanished now from the grassy plains and rolling hill
country, fled mostly to the woods and craggy mountains and other dark
places inconvenient to men. The bones of their castle—a home to usurpers
—remained behind.
   Asu’a the paradox; proud yet ramshackle, festive and forbidding,
seemingly oblivious to changes of tenantry. Asu’a—the Hayholt. It bulked
mountainously above the outlands and town, hunched over its fief like a
sleeping, honey-muzzled bear among her cubs.

                                     •••

   It often seemed that Simon was the only dweller in the great castle who
had not settled into his place in life. The masons plastered the whitewashed
facing of the residence and shored up the castle’s crumbling walls—
although the crumbling did sometimes seem to outpace the restorations—
with never a thought toward how the world spun or why. The pantlers and
butlers, whistling merrily, rolled huge casks of sack and salted beef here
and there. With the castle seneschal beside them, they haggled with farmers
over the whiskery onions and soil-moist carrots brought in sacks to the
Hayholt’s kitchen every morning. And Rachel and her chambermaids were
always excruciatingly busy, flourishing their brooms of bound straw,
chasing dust balls as if herding skittish sheep, muttering pious imprecations
about the way some people left a chamber when they departed, and
generally terrorizing the slothful and slovenly.
   In the midst of such industry, gawky Simon was the fabled grasshopper
in the nest of ants. He knew he would never amount to much: many people
had told him so, and nearly all of them were older—and presumably wiser
—than he. At an age when other boys were clamoring for the
responsibilities of manhood, Simon was still a muddler and a meanderer.
No matter what task he was given to do, his attention soon wandered, and
he would be dreaming of battles, and giants, and sea voyages on tall,
shining ships . . . and somehow, things would get broken, or lost, or done
wrong.
   Other times he could not be found at all. He skulked around the castle
like a scrawny shadow, could shinny up a wall as well as the roof-masons
and glaziers, and knew so many passageways and hiding holes that the
castle folk called him “ghost boy.” Rachel boxed his ears frequently, and
called him a mooncalf.

                                    •••

   Rachel had finally let go of his arm, and Simon dragged his feet glumly
as he followed the Mistress of Chambermaids like a stick caught in a skirt
hem. He had been discovered, his beetle had escaped, and the afternoon was
ruined.
   “What must I do, Rachel,” he mumbled unpleasantly, “help in the
kitchen?”
   Rachel snorted disdainfully and waddled on, a badger in an apron. Simon
looked back regretfully on the sheltering trees and hedges of the garden.
Their commingled footfalls resounded solemnly down the long stone
hallway.

                                    •••

  He had been raised by the chambermaids, but since he was certainly
never going to be one himself—his boy-ness aside, Simon was obviously
not to be trusted with delicate domestic operations—a concerted effort had
been made to find suitable labors for him. In a great house, and the Hayholt
was doubtless the greatest, there was no place for those who did not work.
He found employment of a sort in the castle kitchens, but even at this
undemanding job he was not completely successful. The other scullions
would laugh and nudge each other to see Simon—elbow-deep in hot water,
eyes squinted shut in oblivious reverie—learning the trick of bird flight, or
saving dream-maidens from imaginary beasts as his scrubbing stick floated
off across the washing vat.
   Legend had it that Sir Fluiren—a relative of the famous Sir Camaris of
Nabban—had in his youth come to the Hayholt to be a knight, and had
worked a year in disguise in this same scullery, due to his ineffable
humility. The kitchen workers had teased him—or so the story went—
calling him “Pretty-hands” because the terrible toil did not diminish the fine
whiteness of his fingers.
   Simon had only to look at his own cracked-nail, pink-boiled paws to
know that he was no great lord’s orphan son. He was a scullion and a corner
sweeper, and that was that. At a not much greater age, everyone knew, King
John had slain the Red Dragon. Simon wrestled with brooms and pots. Not
that it made much difference: it was a different, quieter world than in John’s
youth, thanks largely to the old king himself. No dragons—living ones,
anyway—inhabited the dark, endless halls of the Hayholt. But Rachel—as
Simon often cursed to himself—with her sour face and terrible, tweezing
fingers, was near enough.

                                    •••

   They reached the antechamber before the throne room, the center of the
inordinate activity. The chambermaids, moving at a near-run, careened from
wall to wall like flies in a bottle. Rachel stood with fists set on hips and
surveyed her domain—seeming, from the smile that tightened her thin
mouth, to find it good.
   Simon lurked against a tapestried wall, forgotten for a moment.
Slouching, he stared from the corner of his eyes at the new girl Hepzibah,
who was plump and curly-haired and walked with an insolent sway. Passing
by with a sloshing bucket of water she caught his glance and smiled widely,
amused. Simon felt fire crackling up his neck into his cheeks and turned to
pick at the tattered wall hanging.
   Rachel had not missed the exchange of looks.
   “Lord whip you for a donkey, boy, didn’t I tell you to get to work? Have
at it, then!”
   “At what?! Do what?!” Simon shouted, and was mortified to hear
Hepzibah’s silvery giggle float out from the hallway. He pinched his own
arm in frustration. It hurt.
   “Take this broom, and go and sweep out the Doctor’s chambers. That
man lives like a pack rat, and who knows where the king will want to go
now that he’s up?” It was clear from her tone that Rachel found the general
contrariness of men to be undiminished by kingship.
   “Doctor Morgenes’ chambers?” Simon asked; for the first time since he
had been discovered in the garden his spirits rose. “I’ll do it straight away!”
He snatched the broom at a dead run and was gone.
   Rachel snorted and turned back to examine the spotless perfection of the
antechamber. She briefly wondered what could possibly be going on behind
the great throne-room door, then dismissed the errant thought as mercilessly
as she might swat a hovering gnat. Herding her legions with clapping hands
and steely eye, she led them out of the antechamber and off to another
pitched battle against her archenemy, disorder.

                                     •••

   In that hall beyond the door dusty banners hung, row upon row along the
walls, a faded bestiary of fantastic animals: the sun-golden stallion of Clan
Mehrdon, Nabban’s gleaming kingfisher crest, owl and ox, otter, unicorn,
and cockatrice—rank after rank of silent, sleeping creatures. No draft
stirred these threadbare hangings; even the spiderwebs sagged empty and
unstitched.
   Some small change had come to the throne room, though—something
lived once more in the shadowed chamber. Someone was singing a quiet
tune in the thin voice of a very young boy or a very old man.
   At the farthest end of the hall a massive tapestry hung on the stone wall
between the statues of the High Kings of the Hayholt, a tapestry bearing the
royal coat of arms, the Firedrake and the Tree. The grim malachite statues,
an honor guard of six, flanked a huge, heavy chair that seemed entirely
carved from yellowing ivory, the chair arms knobbed and knuckled, the
back capped with a huge, many-toothed serpentine skull whose eyes were
pools of shadow.
   It was on and before this chair that two figures sat. The small one clothed
in worn motley was singing; it was his voice that floated up from the foot of
the throne, too weak to chip loose even a slight echo. Over him bent a gaunt
shape, perched at the edge of the chair like an aged raptor—a tired, hobbled
bird of prey shackled to the dull bone.
   The king, three years sick and enfeebled, had returned to his dusty hall.
He listened as the small man at his feet sang; the king’s long, mottled hands
grasped the arms of his great, yellowing throne.
   He was a tall man—once very tall, but now hunched like a monk at
prayer. He wore a sagging robe of sky blue, and was bearded like a Usirean
prophet. A sword lay athwart his lap, shining as though new-polished; on
his brow sat an iron crown, studded all about with sea-green emeralds and
secretive opals.
   The mannekin at the king’s feet paused for a long, silent moment, then
began another song:

               “Can tha count th’ rain-drops
               When th’ sun is high?
               Can tha swim th’ river
               When th’ bed gang dry?
               Can tha catch a cloud?
               Nay, canst not, nor I . . .
               An’ th’ wind a cry ‘Wait.’
               As a passeth by.
               Th’ wind a cry ‘Wait.’
               As a passeth by . . .”

   When the tune was finished, the tall old man in the blue robe reached
down his hand and the jester took it. Neither said a word.
   John the Presbyter, Lord of Erkynland and High King of all Osten Ard;
scourge of the Sithi and defender of the true faith, wielder of the sword
Bright-Nail, bane of the dragon Shurakai . . . Prester John was sitting once
more upon his chair made of dragon’s bones. He was very, very old, and
had been crying.

                                    •••

   “Ah, Towser,” he breathed at last, his voice deep but flawed with age, “it
is surely an unmerciful God who could bring me to this sorry pass.”
   “Perhaps, my lord.” The little old man in the checkered jerkin smiled a
wrinkled smile. “Perhaps . . . but doubtless many others would not
complain of cruelty if brought to your station in life.”
   “But that is just what I mean, old friend!” The king shook his head
angrily. “In this shadow-age of infirmity, all men are leveled. Any thick-
witted tailor’s apprentice sups more of life than I!”
   “Ah, la now my lord, my lord . . .” Towser’s grizzled head wagged from
side to side, but the bells of his cap—long since clapperless—did not jingle.
“My lord, you complain seasonably, but unreasonably. All men come to this
pass, great or small. You have had a fine life.”
   Prester John lifted the hilt of Bright-Nail before him, holding it as though
it were a Holy Tree. He pulled the back of a long thin hand across his eyes.
   “Do you know the story of this blade?” he asked.
   Towser looked up sharply: he had heard the story many times.
   “Tell me, O King,” he said quietly.
   Prester John smiled, but his eyes never left the leather-bound hilt before
him. “A sword, small friend, is the extension of a man’s right hand . . . and
the end point of his heart.” He lifted the blade up higher, so that it caught a
glimmer of light from one of the tiny, high windows. “Just the same is Man
the good right hand of God—Man is the sharp executor of the Heart of God.
Do you see?”
   Suddenly he was leaning down, eyes bird-bright beneath shaggy brows.
“Do you know what this is?” His shaking finger indicated a bit of crimped,
rusty metal bound into the sword haft with golden wire.
   “Tell me, Lord.” Towser knew perfectly well.
   “This is the only nail of the true Execution Tree still remaining in Osten
Ard.” Prester John brought the hilt forward to his lips and kissed it, then
held the cool metal against his cheek. “This nail came from the palm of
Usires Aedon, our Savior . . . from His hand . . .” The king’s eyes, catching
for a moment a strange half-light from above, were fiery mirrors.
   “And there is also the relic, of course,” he said after a quiet moment, “the
finger-bone of martyred Saint Eahlstan, the dragon-slain, right here in the
hilt. . . .”
   There was another interval of silence, and when Towser looked up his
master was weeping again.
   “Fie, fie on it!” John moaned. “How can I live up to the honor of God’s
Sword? With so much sin, such a weight of it, still staining my soul—the
arm that once smote the red dragon can now scarce lift a milk-cup. Oh, I am
dying, my dear Towser, dying!”
   Towser leaned forward, pulling one of the king’s bony hands free from
the sword-grip and kissing it as the old man sobbed.
   “Oh, please, master,” the jester beseeched. “Weep no more! All men
must die—you, I, everyone. If we are not killed by youthful stupidity or ill-
luck, then it is our fate to live on like the trees: older and older until at last
we totter and fall. It is the way of all things. How can you fight the Lord’s
will?”
   “But I built this kingdom!” A quivering rage was on John the Presbyter
as he pulled his hand free from the jester’s grasp and brought it sharply
down on the arm of his throne. “That must weigh against any blot of sin on
my soul, however dark! Surely the Good Lord will have that in his Book of
Accounts! I dragged these people up from the mud, scourged the cursed,
sneaking Sithi out of the countryside, gave the peasantry law and justice . . .
the good I have done must weigh strongly.” For a moment John’s voice
became fainter, as though his thoughts wandered elsewhere.
   “Ah, my old friend,” he said at last in a bitter voice, “and now I cannot
even walk down to the marketplace on Main Row! I must lie in bed, or
shuffle about this cold castle on the arms of younger men. My . . . my
kingdom lies corrupting on the vine, while servants whisper and tiptoe
outside my bedchamber door! All in sin!”
   The king’s words echoed back from the chamber’s stone walls and
slowly dissipated up among the swirling dust motes. Towser regained
John’s hand and squeezed it until the king was composed once more.
   “Well,” said Prester John after some time had passed, “my Elias will rule
more firmly than I now can, at least. Seeing the decay of all this,” he swept
his hand around the throne room, “today I have decided to call him back
from Meremund. He must prepare to take the crown.” The king sighed. “I
suppose I should leave off my womanish weeping, and be grateful I have
what many kings have not: a strong son to hold my kingdom together after I
am gone.”
   “Two strong sons, Lord.”
    “Fah.” The king grimaced. “I should call Josua many things, but I do not
believe ‘strong’ is one of them.”
    “You are too hard on him, Master.”
    “Nonsense. Do you think to instruct me, jester? Do you know the son
better than the father does?” John’s hand trembled, and for a moment it
seemed he would struggle to his feet. Finally, the tension slackened.
    “Josua is a cynic,” the king began again in a quieter voice. “A cynic, a
melancholic, cold to his inferiors—and a king’s son has nothing but
inferiors, each one a potential assassin. No, Towse, he is a queer one, my
younger—most especially since . . . since he lost his hand. Ah, merciful
Aedon, perhaps the fault is mine.”
    “What do you mean, Lord?”
    “I should have taken another wife after Ebekah died. It has been a cold
house without a queen . . . perhaps that caused the boy’s odd humors. Elias
is not that way, though.”
    “There is a certain crude directness to Prince Elias’ nature,” Towser
muttered, but if the king heard he gave no sign.
    “I thank beneficent God that Elias was first-born. He has a brave, martial
character, that one—I think that if he were the younger, Josua would not be
secure upon the throne.” King John shook his head with cold fondness at
the thought, then groped down and grasped his jester’s ear, tweaking it as if
that old worthy were a child of five or six years.
    “Promise me one thing, Towse . . . ?”
    “What, Lord?”
    “When I die—doubtless soon, I do not think I shall last the winter—you
must bring Elias to this room . . . do you suppose they will hold the
crowning here? Never mind you, if they do then you must wait until it has
ended. Bring him here and give him Bright-Nail. Yes, take it now and hold
it. I fear that I may die while he is away at Meremund or some other place,
and I want it to come straight to his hand with my blessing. Do you
understand, Towse?”
    With shaking hands Prester John pushed the sword back into its tooled
scabbard, and struggled for a moment to unbuckle the baldric on which it
hung. The twining was caught, and Towser got up on his knees to work on
the knot with his strong old fingers.
   “What is the blessing, my Lord?” he asked, tongue between teeth as he
picked at the tangle.
   “Tell him what I have told you. Tell him that the sword is the point of his
heart and hand, just as we are the instruments of the Heart and Hand of God
the Father . . . and tell him that no prize, however noble, is worth . . . is
worth . . .” John hesitated, and drew his trembling fingers to his eyes. “No,
pay that no mind. Speak only what I told you about the sword. Tell him
that.”
   “I shall, my King,” said Towser. He frowned, although he had solved the
knot. “I will gladly do your wish.”
   “Good.” Prester John leaned back once more in his dragonbone chair and
closed his gray eyes. “Sing for me again, Towse.”
   Towser did. Above, the dusty banners seemed to sway slightly, as if a
whisper passed among the crowd of watchers, among the ancient herons
and dull-eyed bears, and others stranger still.