
                        A Two-Frog Story




An idle mind is the Devil’s seedbed.
   Simon reflected ruefully on this, one of Rachel’s favorite expressions, as
he stared down at the display of horse-armor which now lay scattered the
length of the chaplain’s walking-hall. A moment before he had been leaping
happily down the long, tiled hallway which ran along the outer length of the
chapel, on his way to sweep Doctor Morgenes’ chambers. He had been
waving the broom about a little, of course, pretending it was the Tree and
Drake flag of Prester John’s Erkynguard, and that he was leading them into
battle. Perhaps he should have been paying better heed to where he was
waggling it—but what sort of idiot would hang a suit of horse-armor in the
chaplain’s hallway, anyway? Needless to say, the clatter had been ferocious,
and Simon expected skinny, vengeful Father Dreosan to descend at any
minute.
   Hurrying to gather up the dingy armor plates, some of which had torn
loose from the leather straps that bound the suit together, Simon considered
another of Rachel’s maxims—“the Devil finds chores for empty hands.”
That was silly, of course, and made him angry. It was not the emptiness of
his hands, or the idleness of his thoughts that got him into trouble. No, it
was the doing and the thinking that tripped him up time and time again. If
only they would leave him alone!
   Father Dreosan had still not made an entrance by the time he at last
worried the armor into a precarious stack, then hastily pushed it beneath the
skirt of a table rug. In doing so he nearly upset the golden reliquary seated
on the table top, but at last—and with no further mishaps—the sundered
armor was gone from view, with nothing but a slightly cleaner-looking
patch on the wall to proclaim that the suit had ever existed at all. Simon
picked up his broom and scuffed away at the sooty stone, trying to even up
the edges so that the bright spot was not so noticeable, then hurried on
down the hall and out past the winding choir-loft stairs.
   Emerging once more into the Hedge Garden from which he had been so
brutally abducted by the Dragon, Simon halted for a moment to inhale the
pungent smell of greenery, to drive the last of the tallow-soap stench from
his nostrils. His eye was caught by an unusual shape in the upper branches
of the Festival Oak, an ancient tree at the far end of the garden, so gnarled
and convoluted of branch that it looked as though it had grown for centuries
beneath a giant bushel basket. He squinted, hand raised to block the slanting
sunlight. A bird’s nest! And so late in the year!
   It was a very near thing. He had dropped the broom and taken several
steps into the garden before he remembered his mission to Morgenes. If it
had been any other errand he would have been up the tree in an instant, but
getting to see the doctor was a treat, even when it entailed work. He
promised himself that the nest would not remain long unexamined, and
passed on through the hedges and into the courtyard before the Inner Bailey
Gate.
   Two figures had just entered the gate and were coming toward him; one
slow and stumpy, the other stumpier and slower still. It was Jakob the
chandler and his assistant Jeremias. The latter was carrying a large, heavy-
looking bag over his shoulder, and walking—if such was possible—more
sluggishly than usual. Simon called a greeting as they passed. Jakob smiled
and waved.
   “Rachel wants new candles for the dining room,” the chandler shouted,
“so candles she gets!” Jeremias made a sour face.
   A short trot down the sloping greensward brought Simon to the massive
gatehouse. A sliver of afternoon sun still smoldered above the battlements
behind him, and the shadows of the pennants of the Western Wall flopped
like dark fish on the grass. The red-and-white liveried guard—scarcely
older than Simon—smiled and nodded as the master spy pounded past,
deadly broom in hand, head held low in case the tyrant Rachel should
happen to peep from one of the keep’s high windows. Once through the
barbican and hidden in the lee of the high gatewall he slowed to a walk.
Green Angel Tower’s attenuated shadow bridged the moat; the distorted
silhouette of the Angel, triumphant on her spire, lay in a pool of fire at the
water’s farthest edge.
    As long as he was here, Simon decided, he might as well catch some
frogs. It shouldn’t take too long, and the doctor frequently had use for such
things. It wouldn’t really be putting off the errand so much as expanding the
nature of the service. He would have to hurry, though—evening was
coming on swiftly. Already he could hear the crickets laboriously tuning up
for what would be one of the waning year’s last performances and the
bullfrogs beginning their muffled, clunking counterpoint.
    Wading out into the lily-crusted water, Simon paused for a moment to
listen, and to watch the eastern sky darkening to a dull violet. Next to
Doctor Morgenes’ chambers, the moat was his favorite spot in all
Creation . . . all of it that he had seen so far, anyway.
    With an unconscious sigh he pulled off his shapeless cloth hat and
sloshed along toward where the pond grass and hyacinths were thickest.

                                    •••

   The sun had completely vanished and the wind was hissing through the
cattails ringing the moat by the time Simon had reached the Middle Bailey
to stand, clothes a-drip and a frog in each pocket, before the door of
Morgenes’ chambers. He knocked on the stout paneling, careful not to
touch the unfamiliar symbol chalked on the wood. He had learned by hard
experience not to carelessly lay hands on something of the doctor’s without
asking. Several moments passed before Morgenes’ voice was heard.
   “Go away,” it said, in a tone of annoyance.
   “It’s me . . . Simon!” called Simon, and knocked again. There was a
longer pause this time, then the sound of rapid footfalls. The door swung
open. Morgenes, whose head barely reached Simon’s chin, stood framed in
bright blue light, the expression on his face obscured. For a moment he
seemed to stare.
   “What?” he said finally. “Who?”
   Simon laughed. “Me, of course. Do you want some frogs?” He pulled
one of the captives from its prison and held it up by a slippery leg.
   “Oh. Oh!” The doctor seemed to be coming awake as from a deep sleep.
He shook his head. “Simon . . . but naturally! Come in, boy! My
apologies . . . I am a little distracted.” He opened the door wide enough for
Simon to slip past him into the narrow inner hallway, then pulled it closed
again.
   “Frogs, is it? Hmmmm, frogs . . .” The doctor angled past and led him
along the corridor. In the glow of the blue lamps that lined the hall the
doctor’s spindly form, monkeylike, seemed to bound instead of walk.
Simon followed, his shoulders nearly touching the cold stone walls on
either side. He could never understand how rooms that seemed as small as
the doctor’s did from outside—he had looked down on them from the bailey
walls, and paced the distance in the courtyard—how they could have such
long corridors.
   Simon’s musings were interrupted by a hideous eruption of noise echoing
down the passageway—whistles, bangs, and something that sounded like
the hungry baying of a hundred hounds.
   Morgenes jumped in surprise and said: “Oh, Name of a Name, I forgot to
snuff the candles. Wait here.” The small man hurried down the hallway,
wispy white hair fluttering, pulled the door at the end open just a crack—
the howling and whistling doubled its intensity—and slipped quickly inside.
Simon heard a muffled shout.
   The horrendous noise abruptly ceased—as quickly and completely as . . .
as . . .
   As the snuffing of a candle, he thought.
   The doctor poked his head out, smiled, and beckoned him in.
   Simon, who had witnessed scenes of this type before, followed Morgenes
cautiously into his workshop. A hasty entrance could, at the very least,
cause one to step on something strange and unpleasant to contemplate.
   There was now not a trace of whatever had set up that fearful
yammering. Simon again marveled at the discrepancy between what
Morgenes’ rooms seemed to be—a converted guard-barracks perhaps
twenty paces in length, nestled against the ivy-tangled wall of the Middle
Bailey’s northeastern corner—and the view inside, which was of a low-
ceilinged but spacious chamber almost as long as a tournament field,
although not nearly so wide. In the orange light that filtered down from the
long row of small windows overlooking the courtyard Simon peered at the
farthest end of the room and decided he would be hard-pressed to hit it with
a stone from the doorway in which he stood.
   This curious stretching effect, however, was quite familiar. In fact,
despite the terrifying noises, the whole chamber seemed much as it usually
did—as though a horde of crack-brained peddlers had set up shop and then
made a hasty retreat during a wild windstorm. The long refectory table that
spanned the length of the near wall was littered with fluted glass tubes,
boxes, and cloth sacks of powders and pungent salts, as well as intricate
structures of wood and metal from which depended retorts and phials and
other unrecognizable containers. The centerpiece of the table was a great
brazen ball with tiny angled spouts protruding from its shiny skin. It seemed
to float in a dish of silvery liquid, the both of them balanced at the apex of a
carved ivory tripod. The spouts chuffed steam, and the brass globe slowly
revolved.
   The floor and shelves were littered with even stranger articles. Polished
stone blocks and brooms and leather wings were strewn across the
flagstones, vying for space with animal cages—some empty, some not—
metal armatures of unknown creatures covered with ragged pelts or
mismatched feathers, sheets of seemingly clear crystal stacked haphazardly
against the tapestried walls . . . and everywhere books, books, books,
dropped halfway open or propped upright here and there about the chamber
like huge, clumsy butterflies.
   There were also glass balls of colored liquids that bubbled without heat,
and a flat box of glittering black sand that rearranged itself endlessly, as if
swept by unfelt desert breezes. Wooden cabinets on the wall from time to
time disgorged painted wooden birds who cheeped impertinently and
disappeared. Beside these hung maps of countries with totally unfamiliar
geography—although geography, admittedly, was not something Simon felt
too confident about. Taken altogether, the doctor’s lair was a paradise for a
curious young man . . . without doubt, the most wonderful place in Osten
Ard.
   Morgenes had been pacing about in the far corner of the room beneath a
drooping star-chart that linked the bright celestial points together by painted
line to make the shape of an odd, four-winged bird. With a little whistle of
triumph the doctor suddenly leaned down and began to dig like a squirrel in
spring. A flurry of scrolls, brightly painted flannels, and miniature flatware
and goblets from some homunculate supper table rose in the air behind him.
At last he straightened up, hefting a large glass-sided box. He waded to the
table, set the glass cube down, and picked a pair of flasks out of a rack,
apparently at random.
    The liquid in one of them was the color of the sunset skies outside; it
smoked like a censer. The other was full of something blue and viscous
which flowed ever so slowly down into the box as Morgenes upended the
two flasks. Mixing, the fluids turned as clear as mountain air. The doctor
threw his hand out like a traveling performer, and there was a moment’s
pause.
    “Frogs?” Morgenes asked, waggling his fingers. Simon rushed forward,
pulling the two he had caught out of his coat pockets. The doctor took them
and dropped them into the tank with a flourish. The pair of surprised
amphibians plunked into the transparent liquid, sank slowly to the bottom,
then began to swim vigorously about in their new home. Simon laughed
with as much surprise as amusement.
    “Is it water?”
    The old man turned to look at him with bright eyes. “More or less, more
or less . . . So!” Now Morgenes dragged long, bent fingers through his
sparse fringe of beard. “So . . . thank you for the frogs. I think I know what
to do with them already. Quite painless. They may even enjoy it, although I
doubt they’ll like wearing the boots.”
    “Boots?” wondered Simon, but the doctor was off and bustling again,
this time pushing a stack of maps from a low stool. He beckoned Simon to
sit.
    “Well then, young man, what will you take as due coin for your day’s
work? A fithing piece? Or perhaps you would like Coccindrilis here for a
pet?” Chuckling, the doctor brandished a mummified lizard.
    Simon hesitated for a moment over the lizard—it would be a lovely thing
to slip into the linen basket for the new girl Hepzibah to discover—but no.
The thought of the chambermaids and cleaning stuck in his mind, irritating
him. Something wanted to be remembered, but Simon pushed it back. “No,”
he said at last, “I’d like to hear some stories.”
    “Stories?” Morgenes bent forward quizzically. “Stories? You would be
much better off going to old Shem Horsegroom in the stables if you want to
hear such things.”
    “Not that kind,” Simon said hastily. He hoped he hadn’t offended the
little man. Old people were so sensitive! “Stories about real things. How
things used to be—battles, dragons—things that happened!”
    “Aaahh.” Morgenes sat up, and the smile returned to his pink face. “I see.
You mean history.” The doctor rubbed his hands. “That’s better—much
better!” He sprang to his feet and began pacing, stepping nimbly over the
oddments scattered about the floor. “Well, what do you want to hear about,
lad? The fall of Naarved? The Battle of Ach Samrath?”
    “Tell me about the castle,” Simon said. “The Hayholt. Did the king build
it? How old is it?”
    “The castle . . .” The doctor stopped pacing, plucked up a corner of his
worn-shiny gray robe, and began to rub absently at one of Simon’s favorite
curiosities: a suit of armor, exotically designed and colored in wildflower-
bright blues and yellows, made entirely from polished wood.
    “Hmmm . . . the castle . . .” Morgenes repeated. “Well, that’s certainly a
two-frog story, at the very least. Actually, if I were to tell you the whole
story, you would have to drain the moat and bring your warty prisoners in
by the cartload to pay for it. But it is the bare bones of the tale that I think
you want today, and I can certainly give you that. Hold yourself still for a
moment while I find something to wet my throat.”
    As Simon tried to sit quietly, Morgenes went to his long table and picked
up a beaker of brown, frothy liquid. He sniffed it suspiciously, brought it to
his lips, and downed a small gulp. After a moment of consideration he
licked his bare upper lip and pulled his beard happily.
    “Ah, the Stanshire Dark. No doubt on the subject, ale is the stuff! What
were we talking about, then? Oh, yes, the castle.” Morgenes cleared a place
on the table and then—holding his flask carefully—vaulted up with
surprising ease to sit, slippered feet dangling half a cubit above the floor. He
sipped again.
    “I’m afraid this story starts long before our King John. We shall begin
with the first men and women to come to Osten Ard—simple folk, living on
the banks of the Gleniwent. They were mostly herdsmen and fisher-folk,
perhaps driven out from the lost West over some land-bridge that no longer
exists. They caused little trouble for the masters of Osten Ard. . . .”
    “But I thought you said they were the first to come here?” Simon
interrupted, secretly pleased he had caught Morgenes in a contradiction.
    “No. I said they were the first men. The Sithi held this land long before
any man walked on it.”
    “You mean there really were Little Folk?” Simon grinned. “Just like
Shem Horsegroom tells of? Pookahs and niskies and all?” This was
exciting.
    Morgenes shook his head vigorously and took another swallow. “Not
only were, are—although that jumps ahead of my narrative—and they are
by no means ‘little folk’ . . . wait, lad, let me go on.”
    Simon hunched forward and tried to look patient. “Yes?”
    “Well, as I mentioned, the men and Sithi were peaceful neighbors—true,
there was an occasional dispute over grazing land or some such, but since
mankind seemed no real threat the Fair Folk were generous. As time went
on, men began to build cities, sometimes only a half a day’s walk from Sithi
lands. Later still a great kingdom arose on the rocky peninsula of Nabban,
and the mortal men of Osten Ard began to look there for guidance. Are you
still following my trail, boy?”
    Simon nodded.
    “Good.” A long draught. “Well, the land seemed quite big enough for all
to share, until black iron came over the water.”
    “What? Black iron?” Simon was immediately stilled by the doctor’s
sharp look.
    “The shipmen out of the near-forgotten west, the Rimmersmen,”
Morgenes continued. “They landed in the north, armed men fierce as bears,
riding in their long serpent-boats.”
    “The Rimmersmen?” Simon wondered. “Like Duke Isgrimnur at the
court? On boats?”
    “They were great seafarers before they settled here, the Duke’s
ancestors,” Morgenes affirmed. “But when they first came they were not
searching for grazing or farming land, but for plunder. Most importantly
though, they brought iron—or at least the secret of shaping it. They made
iron swords and spears, weapons that would not break like the bronze of
Osten Ard; weapons that could beat down even the witchwood of the Sithi.”
    Morgenes rose and refilled his beaker from a covered bucket standing on
a cathedral of books beside the wall. Instead of returning to the table he
stopped to finger the shiny epaulets of the armor suit.
   “None stood against them for long—the cold, hard spirit of the iron
seemed in the shipmen themselves as much as in their blades. Many folk
fled south, moving closer to the protection of Nabban’s frontier outposts.
The Nabbanai legions, well-organized garrison forces, resisted for a while.
Finally they, too, were forced to abandon the Frostmarch to the
Rimmersmen. There . . . was much slaughter.”
   Simon squirmed happily. “What about the Sithi? You said they had no
iron?”
   “It was deadly to them.” The doctor licked his finger and rubbed away a
spot on the polished wood of the breastplate. “Even they could not defeat
the Rimmersmen in open battle, but,” he pointed the dusty finger at Simon,
as if this fact concerned him personally, “but the Sithi knew their land. They
were close to it—a part of it, even—in a way that the invaders could never
be. They held their own for a long time, falling slowly back on places of
strength. The chiefest of these—and the reason for this whole discourse—
was Asu’a. The Hayholt.”
   “This castle? The Sithi lived in the Hayholt?” Simon was unable to keep
the disbelief out of his voice. “How long ago was it built?”
   “Simon, Simon . . .” The doctor scratched his ear and returned to his
perch on the table. The sunset was completely gone from the windows, and
the torch light divided his face into a mummer’s mask, half illumined, half
dark. “There may, for all I or any mortal can know, have been a castle here
when the Sithi first came . . . when Osten Ard was as new and unsullied as a
snow-melt brook. Sithi-folk certainly dwelled here countless years before
man arrived. This was the first place in Osten Ard to feel the work of
crafting hands. It is the stronghold of the country commanding the water
ways, riding herd on the finest croplands. The Hayholt and its predecessors
—the older citadels that lie buried beneath us—have stood here since before
the memories of mankind. It was very, very old when the Rimmersmen
came.”
   Simon’s mind whirled as the enormity of Morgenes’ statement seeped in.
The old castle seemed suddenly oppressive, its rock walls a cage. He
shuddered and looked quickly around, as though some ancient, jealous
thing might even at this moment be reaching out for him with dusty hands.
   Morgenes laughed merrily—a very young laugh from so old a man—and
hopped down from the table. The torches seemed to glow a little brighter.
“Fear not, Simon. I think—and I, of all people, should know—that there is
not much for you to fear from Sithi magic. Not today. The castle has been
much changed, stone laid over stone, and every ell has been rigorously
blessed by a hundred priests. Oh, Judith and the cooking staff may turn
around from time to time and find a plate of cakes missing, but I think that
can be as logically ascribed to young men as to goblins . . .”
   The doctor was interrupted by a short series of raps upon the chamber
door. “Who is it?” he cried.
   “It’s me,” said a doleful voice. There was a long pause. “Me, Inch,” it
finished.
   “Bones of Anaxos!” swore the doctor, who favored exotic expressions.
“Open the door, then . . . I am too old to run about waiting on fools.”
   The door swung inward. The man framed against the glow of the inner
hallway was probably tall, but hung his head and hunched his body forward
in such a way that it was difficult to make sure. A round, vacant face floated
like a moon just above his breastbone, thatched by spiky black hair that had
been cut with a dull and clumsy knife.
   “I’m sorry I . . . I bothered you, Doctor, but . . . but you said come early,
now didn’t you?” The voice was thick and slow as dripping lard.
   Morgenes gave a whistle of exasperation, and tugged on a coil of his own
white hair. “Yes, I did, but I said early after the dinner hour, which has not
yet arrived. Still, no sense in sending you away. Simon, have you met Inch,
my assistant?”
   Simon nodded politely. He had seen the man once or twice; Morgenes
had him come in some evenings to help, apparently with heavy lifting. It
certainly wouldn’t be for anything else, since Inch did not look as though he
could be trusted to piss on the fire before going to bed.
   “Well, young Simon, I’m afraid that will have to put an end to my
windiness for the day,” the old man said. “Since Inch is here, I must use
him. Come back soon, and I will tell you more—if you like.”
   “Certainly.” Simon nodded once more to Inch, who rolled a cowlike gaze
after him. He had reached the door, almost touched it, when a sudden vision
blazed into life in his head: a clear picture of Rachel’s broom, lying where
he had left it, on the grass beside the moat like the corpse of a strange water
bird.
   Mooncalf!
   He would say nothing. He could collect the broom on his way back, and
tell the Dragon that the chore was finished. She had so much to think about,
and, although she and the doctor were two of the castle’s oldest residents,
they seldom spoke. It was obviously the best plan.
   Without understanding why, Simon turned back. The little man was
scrutinizing a curling scroll, bent over the table while Inch stood behind
him staring at nothing particular.
   “Doctor Morgenes . . .”
   At the sound of his name the doctor looked up, blinking. He seemed
surprised that Simon was still in the room; Simon was surprised, too.
   “Doctor, I’ve been a fool.”
   Morgenes arched his eyebrows, waiting.
   “I was supposed to sweep your room. Rachel asked me to. Now the
whole afternoon has gone by.”
   “Oh. Ah!” Morgenes’ nose wrinkled as if it itched him, then he broke out
a wide smile. “Sweep my chamber, eh? Well, lad, come back tomorrow and
do it. Tell Rachel that I have more work for you, if she will be so good as to
let you go.” He turned back to his book, then looked up again, eyes
narrowing, and pursed his lips. As the doctor sat in silent thought, the
elation Simon was feeling changed suddenly to nervousness.
   Why is he staring at me like that?
   “Come to think of it, boy,” the man finally said, “I will be having many
chores coming up that you could help me with—and eventually I will need
an apprentice. Come back tomorrow, as I said. I will talk with the Mistress
of Chambermaids about the other.” He smiled briefly, then turned back to
his scroll. Simon was suddenly aware that Inch was staring across the
doctor’s back at him, an unreadable expression moving beneath the placid
surface of his whey-colored face. Simon turned and sprinted through the
door. Exhilaration caught him up as he bounded down the blue-lit hallway
and emerged under dark, cloud-smeared skies. Apprentice! To the doctor!
   When he reached the gatehouse, he stopped and climbed down to the
edge of the moat to look for the broom. The crickets were well into the
evening’s chorale. When he found it at last, he sat down for a moment
against the wall near the water’s brink to listen.
   As the rhythmic song rose around him, he ran his fingers along the
nearby stones. Caressing the surface of one worn as smooth as hand-
burnished cedar, he thought:
   This stone may have been standing here since . . . since before our Lord
Usires was born. Perhaps some Sithi boy once sat here in this same quiet
place, listening to the night. . . .
   Where did that breeze come from?
   A voice seemed to whisper, whisper, the words too faint to hear.
   Perhaps he ran his hands across this same stone. . . .
   A whisper on the wind: We will have it back, manchild. We will have it
all back. . . .
   Clutching the neck of his coat tight against the unexpected chill, Simon
got up and climbed the grassy slope, suddenly lonesome for familiar voices
and light.