
                        Birds in the Chapel




“By the Blessed Aedon . . .”
    Whack!
    “. . . And Elysia his mother . . .”
    Whack! Whack!
    “. . . And all the saints that watch over . . .”
    Whack!
    “. . . Watch over . . . ouch!” A hiss of frustration. “Damned spiders!” The
whacking resumed, curses and invocations laid on between. Rachel was
cleaning cobwebs from the dining hall ceiling.
    Two girls sick and another with a twisted ankle. This was the kind of day
that put a dangerous glint in Rachel the Dragon’s agate eye. Bad enough to
have Sarrah and Jael down with the fluxion—Rachel was a hard
taskmistress, but she knew that every day of working a sick girl could mean
losing her three days in the longer run—yes, bad enough that Rachel had to
pick up the slack left by their absence. As if she did not do two people’s
work already! Now the seneschal said the king would dine in the Great Hall
tonight, and Elias, the Prince Regent, had arrived from Meremund, and
there was even more work to do!
    And Simon, sent off an hour before to pick a few bundles of rushes, was
still not back.
    So, here she stood with her tired old body perched on a rickety stool,
trying to get the spiderwebs out of the ceiling’s high corners with a broom.
That boy! That, that . . .
  “Holy Aedon give strength . . .”
  Whack! Whack! Whack!
  That damnable boy!

                                     •••

    It was not enough, Rachel reflected later as she slumped red-faced and
sweaty on the stool, that the boy was lazy and difficult. She had done her
best over the years to thump the contrariness out of him; he was certainly a
better person for it, she knew. No, by the Good Mother of God, what was
worse was that no one else seemed to care! Simon was man-tall, and at an
age when he should be doing nearly a man’s work—but no! He hid and slid
and mooned about. The kitchen workers laughed at him. The chambermaids
coddled him, and snuck dinner to him when she, Rachel, had banished him
from table. And Morgenes! Merciful Elysia, the man actually encouraged
him!
    And now he had asked Rachel if the boy could come and work for him
every day, sweeping up, helping to keep things clean—hah!—and assisting
the old man with some of his work. As if she didn’t know better. The two of
them would sit about, the old souse guzzling ale and telling the boy Heaven
knew what kind of devil’s stories.
    Still, she couldn’t help considering his offer. It was the first time anyone
had asked for the boy, or wanted him at all—he was so underfoot all the
time! And Morgenes had really seemed to think he could do the boy some
good. . . .
    The doctor often irritated Rachel with his fancy talk and his flowery
speeches—which the Mistress of Chambermaids felt sure were disguised
mockery—but he did seem to care about the boy. He had always kept an
eye out for what was best for Simon . . . a suggestion here, an idea there, a
quiet intercession once when the Master of Scullions had thrashed him and
banished him from the kitchens. Morgenes had always kept a watch on the
boy.
    Rachel looked up at the broad beams of the ceiling, her gaze traveling off
into the shadows. She blew a strand of damp hair off of her face.
    Starting back on that rainy night, she thought—what was it, almost
fifteen years ago? She felt so old, thinking back this way . . . it seemed only
a moment. . . .




   The rain had been sheeting down all day and night. As Rachel went
gingerly across the muddy courtyard, holding her cloak over her head with
one hand, the lantern in the other, she stepped in a wide wagon rut and felt
the water splash her calves. Her foot came free with a sucking sound, but
without a shoe. She cursed bitterly and hurried forward. She would catch
her death running around on such a night with one foot bare, but there was
no time to go digging about in puddles.
   A light was burning in Morgenes’ study, but it seemed to take forever for
the footsteps to come. When he opened the door she saw that he had been
abed: he wore a long nightshirt in need of mending, and rubbed his eyes
groggily in the lantern-glare. The tangled blankets of his bed, surrounded by
a leaning palisade of books in the room’s far corner, made Rachel think of
some foul animal’s nest.
   “Doctor, come quick!” she said. “You must come quick, now!”
   Morgenes stared, then stepped back. “Come in, Rachel. I have no idea
what nocturnal palpitations have brought you, but since you are here . . .”
   “No, no, you foolish man, it’s Susanna! Her time is here, but she is very
weak. I’m afraid for her.”
   “Who? What? Never mind, then. Just a moment, let me get my things.
What a dreadful night! Go on, I shall catch up to you.”
   “But, Doctor Morgenes, I brought the lantern for you.”
   Too late. The door was closed, and she was alone on the step with rain
dribbling off her long nose. Cursing, she splashed back to the servant’s
quarters.
   It was not long before Morgenes was stamping up the stairs shaking the
water from his cloak. At the doorway he absorbed the scene in a single
glance: a woman on the bed with her face turned away, big with child and
groaning. Dark hair lay across her face, and she squeezed in a sweaty fist
the hand of another young woman who kneeled beside her. At the foot of
the bed Rachel stood with an older woman.
   The old one stepped toward Morgenes while he shed his bulky outer
clothing.
   “Hello, Elispeth,” he said quietly. “How does it look?”
   “Not good, I’m afraid, sir. You know I could have dealt with it otherwise.
She’s been trying for hours, and she’s bleeding. Her heart is very faint.” As
Elispeth spoke, Rachel moved nearer.
   “Hmmm.” Morgenes bent and rummaged in the sack he had brought.
“Give her some of this, please,” he said, handing Rachel a stoppered vial.
“Just a swallow, but mind she gets it.” He returned to searching his bag as
Rachel gently pried open the clenched, trembling jaw of the woman on the
bed and poured a little of the liquid into her mouth. The odor of sweat and
blood that suffused the room was suddenly supplemented by a pungent,
spicy scent.
   “Doctor,” Elispeth was saying as Rachel returned, “I don’t think we can
save both mother and child—if we can even save one.”
   “You must save the child’s life,” Rachel interrupted. “That’s the duty of
the Godfearing. The priest says so. Save the child.”
   Morgenes turned to her with a look of annoyance. “My good woman, I
will fear God in my own way, if you don’t mind. If I save her—and I do not
pretend to know I can—then she can always have another child.”
   “No, she can’t,” Rachel said hotly. “Her husband’s dead.” Morgenes of
all people should know that, she thought. Susanna’s fisherman husband had
often visited the doctor before he drowned—although what they might have
had to talk about, Rachel could not imagine.
   “Well,” Morgenes said distractedly, “she can always find another—what?
Her husband?” A startled look came to his face, and he hurried to the
bedside. He seemed to finally realize who it was lying there, bleeding her
life out on the rough sheet.
   “Susanna?” he asked quietly, and turned the woman’s fearful, pain-
clenched face toward him. Her eyes opened wide for a moment as she saw
him, then another wave of agony shut them again. “Ah, what has happened
here?” Morgenes sighed. Susanna could only moan, and the doctor looked
up at Rachel and Elispeth with anger on his face. “Why didn’t anyone
inform me that this poor girl was ready to bear her child?”
   “She was not due for two months more,” Elispeth said gently. “You know
that. We are as surprised as you.”
   “And why should you care that a fisherman’s widow was going to have a
baby?” Rachel said. She could be angry, too. “And why are you arguing
about it now?”
   Morgenes stared at her for a moment, then blinked twice. “You are
absolutely correct,” he said, and turned back to the bed. “I will save the
child, Susanna,” he told the shivering woman.
   She nodded her head once, then cried out.

                                     •••

   It was a thin, keening wail, but it was the cry of a living baby. Morgenes
handed the tiny, red-smeared creature to Elispeth.
   “A boy,” he said, and returned his attention to the mother. She was quiet
now and breathing more slowly, but her skin was white as Harcha marble.
   “I saved him, Susanna. I had to,” he whispered. The corners of the
woman’s mouth twitched—it might have been a smile.
   “I . . . know . . .” she said, voice coming ever so softly in her raw throat.
“If only . . . my Eahlferend . . . had not . . .” The effort was too much, and
she stopped. Elispeth leaned down to show her the child, wrapped in
blankets, still attached by the bloody umbilicus.
   “He’s small,” the old woman smiled, “but that’s because he arrived so
early. What is his name?”
   “. . . Call . . . him . . . Seoman . . .” Susanna croaked out. “. . . it
means . . . ‘waiting’ . . .” She turned to Morgenes and seemed to want to say
something more. The doctor leaned closer, his white hair brushing her
snow-pale cheek, but she could not make the words come. A moment later
she gasped once, and her dark eyes rolled up until the whites showed. The
girl holding her hand began to sob.
   Rachel, too, felt tears come to her eyes. She turned away and pretended
to begin cleaning up. Elispeth was severing the infant’s last tie to his dead
mother.
   The movement caused Susanna’s right hand, which had been tightly
tangled in her own hair, to sag free and drop limply to the floor. As it
struck, something shiny flew from her clutching palm and rolled across the
rough boards to stop near the doctor’s foot. From the corner of her eye
Rachel saw Morgenes stoop down and pick the object up. It was small, and
disappeared easily into the palm of his hand, and from there into his bag.
   Rachel was outraged, but no one else seemed to have noticed. She
whirled to confront him, teardrops still standing in her eyes, but the look on
his face, the terrible grief, stilled her before she breathed a word.
   “He will be Seoman,” the doctor said, his eyes strange and shadowed
now as he moved closer, his voice hoarse. “You must take care of him,
Rachel. His parents are dead, you know.”




    A swift intake of breath. Rachel had caught herself just before she
slipped off the stool. Nodding off in bright daylight—she was ashamed of
herself! Then again, it only went to show the criminal length to which she
had driven herself today, all in an effort to make up for the three girls
off . . . and for Simon.
    What she needed was a little fresh air. Up on a stool, swatting the broom
around like a madwoman—no wonder a body started getting the vapors.
She’d just step outside for a moment. The lord knew she had every right to
a little fresh air. That Simon, such a wicked boy.
    They’d raised him, of course, she and the chambermaids. Susanna hadn’t
any kinfolk nearby, and no one seemed to know much of anything about her
drowned husband Eahlferend, so they kept the boy. Rachel had pretended to
raise a fuss over it, but she would no more have let him go than she would
have betrayed her King, or left beds unmade. It was Rachel who had given
him the name Simon. Everyone in the service of King John’s household
took a name from the king’s native island, Warinsten. Simon was the closest
to Seoman, and so Simon it was.
    Rachel went slowly down the stairs to the bottom floor, feeling just a
little shaky in the legs. She wished she’d brought a cloak, as the air was
bound to be nippy. The door creaked open slowly—it was such a heavy
door, needed the hinges oiled, most likely—and she walked out into the
entry yard. The morning sun was just nosing over the battlement, peeping
like a child.
   She liked this spot, just underneath the stone span that connected the
dining hall building with the main body of the chapel. The little courtyard
in the shadow of the span was full of pine trees and heather, all set about on
small, sloping hills; the whole garden was not more than a stone’s throw in
length. Looking up past the stone walkway she could see the needle-slim
thrust of Green Angel Tower, shining white in the sunlight like an ivory
tusk.
   There had been a time, Rachel remembered, long before Simon came,
when she herself had been a girl playing in this garden. How some of those
maids would laugh to think of that: the Dragon as a little girl. Well, she had
been, and after that a young lady—not unpleasant to look at, either, and that
was only the truth. The garden then had been full of the rustle of brocade
and silk, of lords and ladies laughing, with hawks on their fists and a merry
song on their lips.
   Now Simon, he thought he knew everything—God just made young men
stupid, and that was that. Those girls had nearly spoiled him beyond
redemption, and would have if Rachel hadn’t kept her eye out. She knew
what was what, even if these young ones thought otherwise.
   Things were different once, Rachel thought . . . and as she thought it the
pine smell of the shaded garden seemed to catch at her heart. The castle had
been such a beautiful, stirring place: tall knights, plumed and shiny-mailed,
and beautiful girls in fine dresses, the music . . . oh, and the tourney field all
jewel-bright with tents! Now the castle slept quietly, and only dreamed. The
towering battlements were commanded by Rachel’s kind: by cooks and
chambermaids, seneschals and scullions. . . .

                                      •••

   It was a little chilly. Rachel leaned forward, hugging her shawl tighter,
then straightened up staring. Simon stood before her, hands hidden behind
his back. How on the earth had he managed to slip up on her that way? And
why did he have that idiot grin smeared across his face? Rachel felt the
strength of righteousness come surging back into her body. His shirt—clean
an hour before—was blackened with dirt and torn in several places, as were
his breeches.
   “Blessed Saint Rhiap save me!” Rachel shrieked. “What have you done,
you fool boy!?” Rhiappa had been an Aedonite woman of Nabban who had
died with the name of the One God on her lips after being repeatedly
violated by sea-pirates. She was a great favorite with domestics.
   “Look what I have, Rachel!” Simon said, producing a tattered, lopsided
cone of straw: a bird’s nest. It gave off faint chirps. “I found it underneath
Hjeldin’s Tower! It must have blown off in the wind. Three of them are still
alive, and I’m going to raise them!”
   “Are you utterly mad?” Rachel lifted her broom on high, like the
vengeful lightnings of the Lord that had surely destroyed Rhiap’s ravishers.
“You are no more going to raise those creatures in my household than I am
going to swim to Perdruin! Filthy things flying around, getting in people’s
hair—and look at your clothes! Do you know how long it will take Sarrah
to patch all that?” The broomstick quivered in the air.
   Simon cast his eyes down. He had not found the nest on the ground, of
course: it was the one he had spotted in the Hedge Garden, partially
dislodged from its seat in the Festival Oak. He had climbed up to rescue it,
and in his excitement at the thought of having the young birds for his own
he had not given a thought to the work he was making for Sarrah, the quiet,
homely girl who did the downstairs mending. A wave of gloom and
frustration washed over him.
   “But Rachel, I remembered to pick the rushes!” He balanced the nest
carefully and pulled from beneath his jerkin a meager, bedraggled clump of
reeds.
   Rachel’s expression softened somewhat, but the scowl remained. “It’s
just that you don’t think boy, you don’t think—you’re like a little child. If
something gets broken, or something is done late, someone has to take
responsibility for it. That’s the way the world is. I know you mean no real
harm, but must you be so By-Our-Lady stupid?”
   Simon looked up cautiously. Although his face still showed sorrow and
contrition in proper measure, Rachel with her basilisk eye could see that he
thought he was through the worst of it. Her brow re-beetled.
   “I’m sorry, Rachel, truly I am . . .” he was saying when she reached out
and poked his shoulder with her broom handle.
   “Don’t you come to the old ‘sorry’ with me, lad. Just you take those
birds out of here and put them back. There’ll be no flapping, flying
creatures ’round these parts.”
   “Oh, Rachel, I could keep them in a cage! I could build one!”
   “No, no, and once more means no. Take them and give them to your
useless doctor if you want, but don’t bring them ’round to trouble honest
people who have work to do.”
   Simon trudged off, the nest cupped in his hands. He had made a
miscalculation somewhere—Rachel had almost given in, but she was a
tough old stalk. The slightest error in dealing with her meant swift, terrible
defeat.
   “Simon!” she called. He whirled.
   “I can keep them?!”
   “Of course not. Don’t be a mooncalf.” She stared at him. An
uncomfortably long time passed; Simon shifted from foot to foot and
waited.
   “You go work for the doctor, boy,” she said at last. “Maybe he can
squeeze some sense into you. I give up.” She glowered at him. “Mind you
do what you’re told, and thank him—and what little luck you have left—for
this one last chance. Understand?”
   “Yes, certainly!” he said happily.
   “You’re not escaping from me all that easily. Be back at dinner hour.”
   “Yes, mistress!” Simon turned to hurry off to Morgenes, then stopped.
   “Rachel? Thank you.”
   Rachel made a noise of disgust and marched back toward the stairs to the
dining hall. Simon wondered how she had gotten so many pine needles
stuck in her shawl.

                                    •••

   A gentle mist of snow had begun to float down from the low, tin-colored
clouds. The weather had turned for good, Simon knew: it would be cold
right through to Candlemansa. Rather than carry the baby birds across the
windy courtyard, he decided to duck through the chapel and continue
through to the western side of the Inner Bailey. Morning prayers had been
over for an hour or two, and the church should be empty. Father Dreosan
might not look kindly on Simon tramping through his lair, but the good
father was undoubtedly entrenched at table with his usual large midmorning
meal, humming ominously at the quality of the butter or the consistency of
the honey-and-bread pudding.
   Simon climbed the two dozen steps up to the chapel’s side door. The
snow had started to flurry; the gray stone of the doorway was dotted with
the wet residue of dying flakes. The door swung back on surprisingly silent
hinges.
   Rather than leave telltale wet footprints across the tile floor of the chapel,
he pushed through the velvet hangings at the back of the entry chamber and
climbed another set of stairs to the choir loft.
   The cluttered, stuffy loft, a steaming misery-box during high summer,
was now pleasantly warm. The floor was strewn with bits of the monks’
leavings: nutshells, an apple core, scraps of slate roof tiles on which
messages had been written in petty contravention of the silence vows—it
looked more like a cage for apes or festival bears than a room where men of
God came to sing the Lord’s praises. Simon smiled, threading his way
quietly among the various other oddments strewn about—bolts of
plaincloth, a few small, flimsy wooden stools. It was nice to know that
those dour-faced, shaven-headed men could be as unruly as farm boys.
   Alarmed by the sudden sound of conversation, Simon stopped and edged
back into the wall hanging that blanketed the rear of the loft. Crushed into
the musty fabric, he held his breath as his heart raced. If Father Dreosan or
Barnabas the sexton were below, he would never make his way down and
out the far door unobserved. He would have to sneak back out the way he
had come, using the courtyard route after all—the master-spy in the
enemy’s camp.
   Squatting, silent as cotton wool, Simon strained to locate those who
spoke. He seemed to hear two voices; as he concentrated the birdlings
peeped quietly in his hands. He balanced the nest carefully for a moment in
the crook of his elbow while he pulled off his hat—more woe to him if
Father Dreosan should catch him hatted in the chapel!—then slid the soft
brim down over the top of the nest. The chicks went promptly silent, as if
night had fallen. Parting the edges of the hanging with trembling care he
leaned his head out. The voices were rising from the aisle below the altar.
Their tone seemed unaltered: he had not been heard.
   Only a few torches were lit. The vast roof of the chapel was almost
entirely painted in shadow, the shining windows of the dome seeming to
float in a nighttime sky, holes in the darkness through which the lines of
Heaven could be seen. His foundlings capped and delicately cradled, Simon
crept forward on noiseless feet to the rail of the choir loft. Positioning
himself at the shadowy end nearest the staircase descending to the chapel
proper, he poked his face between the carved rails of the balustrade, one
cheek against the martyrdom of Saint Tunath, the other rubbing the birth of
Saint Pelippa of the Island.
   “. . . And you, with your God-be-cursed complaining!” one of the voices
railed. “I have grown unutterably tired of it.” Simon could not see the
speaker’s face: his back was to the loft, and he wore a high-collared cloak.
His companion, however—slumped across from him on a pew-bench—was
quite visible; Simon recognized him at once.
   “People who are told things they do not want to hear often call such
tidings ‘complaining,’ brother,” said the one on the bench, and waved a
slim-fingered left hand wearily. “I warn you about the priest out of love for
the kingdom.” There was a moment’s silence. “And in memory of the
affection we once shared.”
   “You may say anything, anything you wish to!” the first man barked, his
anger sounding strangely like pain, “but the Chair is mine by law and our
father’s wish. Nothing you think, say, or do can change that!”
   Josua Lackhand, as Simon had often heard the King’s younger son
called, pushed himself stiffly up from the bench. His pearl-gray tunic and
hose bore subtle patterns of red and white; he wore his brown hair cropped
close to his face and high upon his forehead. Where his right hand should
have been, a capped cylinder of black leather protruded from his sleeve.
   “I do not want the Dragonbone Chair—believe that, Elias,” he hissed.
His words were soft-spoken, but they flew to Simon’s hiding place like
arrows. “I merely warn you against the priest Pryrates, a man with . . .
unhealthy interests. Do not bring him here, Elias. He is a dangerous man—
believe me, for I know him of old from the Usirean seminary in Nabban.
The monks there shunned him like a plague carrier. And yet you continue to
give him your ear, as though he were trustworthy as Duke Isgrimnur or old
Sir Fluiren. Fool! He will be the ruin of our house.” He composed himself.
“I seek only to offer a word of heartfelt advice to you. Please believe me. I
have no designs on the throne.”
   “Then leave the castle!” Elias growled, and turned his back on his
brother, arms crossed on his chest. “Go, and let me prepare to rule as a man
should—free of your complaints and manipulation.”
   The older prince had the same high brow and hawklike nose, but was far
more powerfully built than Josua; he looked like a man who could break
necks with his hands. His hair, like his riding boots and tunic, was black.
His cloak and hose were a travel-stained green.
   “We are both our father’s sons, O King-to-be . . .” Josua’s smile was
mocking. “The crown is yours by right. The griefs we bear against each
other need not worry you. Your soon-to-be-royal self will be quite safe—
my word on that. But,” his voice gained force, “I will not, do you hear me,
will not be ordered out of my sire’s house by anyone. Not even you, Elias.”
   His brother turned and stared; as their eyes met it seemed to Simon a
flash of swords.
   “Griefs we bear against each other?” Elias snarled, and there was
something broken and agonized in his voice. “What grief can you bear
against me? Your hand?” He walked away from Josua a few steps, and
stood with his back to his brother, his words thick with bitterness. “The loss
of a hand. Because of you, I stand a widower, and my daughter half an
orphan. Do not speak to me of grief!”
   Josua seemed to hold his breath for a time before replying.
   “Your pain . . . your pain is known to me, brother,” he said at last. “Do
you not know, I would have given not just my right hand, but my life . . . !”
   Elias whirled, reaching a hand to his throat, and pulled something
glittering from out of his tunic. Simon gaped between the railings. It was
not a knife, but something soft and yielding, like a swatch of shimmering
cloth. Elias held it before his brother’s startled face for a sneering moment,
then threw it to the floor, pivoted on his heel and stalked away up the aisle.
Josua stood motionless for a long moment, then bent, like a man in a dream,
to pick up the bright object—a woman’s silver scarf. As he stared, its gleam
cupped in his hand, a grimace of pain or rage twisted his face. Simon
breathed in and out several times before Josua at last tucked the thing into
the breast of his shirt and followed his brother out of the chapel.
   A lengthy interval had passed before Simon felt safe to creep down from
his spying-place and make his way to the chapel’s main door. He felt as
though he had witnessed a strange puppet show, a Usires Play enacted for
him alone. The world suddenly seemed less stable, less trustworthy, if the
princes of Erkynland, heirs to all of Osten Ard, could shout and brawl like
drunken soldiers.
   Peering into the hall, Simon was startled by a sudden movement: a figure
in a brown jerkin hurrying away up the corridor—a small figure, a youth of
perhaps Simon’s age or less. The stranger flicked a glance backward—a
brief glimpse of startled eyes—and then was gone around the corner. Simon
did not recognize him. Could this person have been spying on the princes,
too? Simon shook his head, feeling as confused and stupid as a sun-struck
ox. He pulled his hat off the nest, bringing daylight and chirping life back to
the birds. Again he shook his head. It had been an unsettling morning.