
                            Cricket Cage




Morgenes was rattling about his workshop, deeply engaged in a search
for a missing book. He waved Simon permission to find a cage for the
young birds, then went back to his hunt, toppling piles of manuscripts and
folios like a blind giant in a city of fragile towers.
   Finding a home for the nestlings was more difficult than Simon had
expected: there were plenty of cages, but none seemed quite right. Some
had bars so widely spaced that they seemed built for pigs or bears; others
were already crammed full of strange objects, none of which resembled
animals in the least. Finally he found one that seemed suitable beneath a
roll of shiny cloth. It was knee-high and bell-shaped, made of tightly
twisted river reeds, empty but for a layer of sand on the bottom; there was a
small door on the side held closed by a twist of rope. Simon worried the
knot loose and opened it.
   “Stop! Stop that this instant!”
   “What?!” Simon leaped back. The doctor hopped past him and pushed
the cage door shut with his foot.
   “Sorry to alarm you, boy,” Morgenes panted, “but I should have thought
before sending you off to dig and muck about. This is no good for your
purposes, I’m afraid.”
   “But why not?” Simon leaned forward, squinting, but could see nothing
extraordinary.
   “Well, my grub, stand here for a bit and don’t touch, and I’ll show you.
Silly of me not to have remembered.” Morgenes cast about for a moment
until he found a long-ignored basket of dried fruit. He blew the dust off a
fig as he walked to the cage.
   “Now observe carefully.” He opened the door and tossed in the fruit; it
landed in the sand on the cage bottom.
   “Yes?” asked Simon, puzzled.
   “Wait,” whispered the doctor. No sooner had the word passed his lips
than something began to happen. At first it seemed that the air in the cage
was shimmering; it quickly became apparent that the sand itself was
shifting, eddying delicately around the fig. Suddenly—so suddenly that
Simon jumped backward with a surprised grunt—a great toothy mouth
opened in the sand, gulping the fruit as swiftly as a carp might break the
surface of a pond to take a mosquito. There was a brief ripple along the
sand, and then the cage was still again, as innocent-seeming as before.
   “What’s under there?” Simon gasped. Morgenes laughed.
   “That’s it!” He seemed very pleased. “That’s the beastie itself! There is
no sand: it’s just a masquerade, so to speak. The whole thing at the bottom
of the cage is one clever animal. Lovely, isn’t it?”
   “I suppose so,” said Simon, without much conviction. “Where does it
come from?”
   “Nascadu, out in the desert countries. You can see why I didn’t want you
poking about in there—I don’t think your feathered orphans would have
had a very happy time of it, either.”
   Morgenes shut the cage door again, binding it closed with a leather
thong, and placed it on a high shelf. Having climbed onto his table to
accomplish this, he then continued along its great length, stepping expertly
over the litter until he found what he wanted and hopped down. This
container, made of thin strips of wood, held no suspicious sand.
   “Cage for crickets,” the doctor explained, and helped the youth move the
birds into their new home. A small dish of water was placed within; from
somewhere else Morgenes even produced a tiny sack of seeds, which he
scattered on the cage floor.
   “Are they old enough for that?” Simon wondered. The doctor waved a
careless hand.
   “Not to worry,” he said. “Good for their teeth.”
   Simon promised his birds that he would be back soon with something
more suitable, and followed the doctor across the workshop.
   “Well, young Simon, charmer of finch and swallow,” Morgenes smiled,
“what can I do for you this cold forenoon? It seems to me that we had not
completed your just and honorable frog transaction the other day when we
were forced to stop.”
   “Yes, and I was hoping . . .”
   “And I believe there was another thing, too?”
   “What?” Simon thought hard.
   “A little matter of a floor in need of sweeping? A broom, lone and lorn,
aching in its twiggy heart to be put to use?”
   Simon nodded glumly. He had hoped an apprenticeship might start on a
more auspicious note.
   “Ah. A small aversion to menial labor?” The doctor cocked an eyebrow.
“Understandable but misplaced. One should treasure those humdrum tasks
that keep the body occupied but leave the mind and heart unfettered. Well,
we shall strive to help you through your first day in service. I have thought
of a wonderful arrangement.” He did a funny little jig-step. “I talk, you
work. Good, eh?”
   Simon shrugged. “Do you have a broom? I forgot mine.”
   Morgenes poked around behind the door, producing at last an object so
worn and cobwebby it was scarcely recognizable as a tool for sweeping.
   “Now,” the doctor said, presenting it to him with as much dignity as if it
were the king’s own standard, “what do you want me to talk to you about?”
   “About the sea-raiders and their black iron, and the Sithi . . . and our
castle, of course. And King John.”
   “Ah, yes.” He nodded thoughtfully. “A longish list, but if we are not
once again interrupted by that cloth-headed sluggard Inch, I might be able
to whittle it down a bit. Set to, boy, set to—let the dust fly! By the by,
where exactly in the story was I . . . ?”
   “Oh, the Rimmersmen had come, and the Sithi were retreating, and the
Rimmersmen had iron swords and they were chopping people up, and
killing everyone, killing the Sithi with black iron . . .”
   “Hmmm,” said Morgenes dryly, “it comes back to me now. Hmm. Well,
truth be told, the northern raiders were not killing quite everybody; neither
were their expansions and assaults quite so relentless as I may have made
them sound. They were many years in the north before they ever crossed
the Frostmarch—even then they ran into a major obstacle: the men of
Hernystir.”
    “Yes, but the Sithi-folk . . . !” Simon was impatient. He knew all about
the Hernystiri—had met many people from that pagan western land. “You
said that the little people had to flee from the iron swords!”
    “Not little people, Simon, I . . . oh, my!” The doctor slumped down onto
a pile of leather-bound books and pulled at his sparse chinwhiskers. “I can
see that I must give this story in greater depth. Are you expected back for
the midday meal?”
    “No,” Simon lied promptly. An uninterrupted story from the doctor
seemed a fair bargain for one of Rachel’s fabled thrashings.
    “Good. Well, then, let us find ourselves some bread and onions . . . and
perhaps a noggin of something to drink—talking is such thirsty work—then
I shall endeavor to turn dross to purest Metal Absolute: in short, to teach
you something.”
    When they had provisioned themselves, the doctor once more took a
seat.
    “Well and well, Simon—oh, and don’t be bashful about wielding that
broom while you eat. The young are so flexible!—now, correct me please if
I misspeak. The day today is Drorsday, the fifteenth—sixteenth?—no,
fifteenth of Novander. And the year is 1164, is it not?”
    “I think so.”
    “Excellent. Do put that over on the stool, will you? So, the eleven-
hundred and sixty-fourth year since what? Do you know?” Morgenes leaned
forward.
    Simon pulled a sour face. The doctor knew he was a mooncalf and was
teasing him. How was a scullion supposed to know about such things? He
continued to sweep in silence.
    After some moments he looked up. The doctor was chewing, staring at
him intently over a crusty chunk of dark bread.
    What sharp blue eyes the old man has!
    Simon turned away again.
    “Well, then?” the doctor said around a mouthful. “Since what?”
    “I don’t know,” Simon muttered, hating the sound of his own resentful
voice.
   “So be it. You don’t know—or you think you don’t. Do you listen to the
proclamations when the crier reads them?”
   “Sometimes. When I’m at Market. Otherwise Rachel tells me what they
say.”
   “And what comes at the end? They read the date at the end, do you
remember?—and mind that crystal urn, boy, you sweep like a man shaving
his worst enemy. What does it say at the end?”
   Simon, nettled with shame, was about to throw the broom down and
leave when suddenly a phrase floated up from the depths of his memory,
bringing with it market-sounds—the wind-snapping of pennants and
awnings—and the clean smell of spring grass strewn underfoot.
   “Since the Founding.” He was sure. He heard it as though he were
standing on Main Row.
   “Excellent!” The doctor lifted his jar as if in salute and knocked back a
long swallow. “Now, the ‘Founding’ of what? Don’t worry,” he continued
as Simon began to shake his head, “I’ll tell you. I don’t expect young men
these days—raised as they are on apocryphal errantry and derringdo—to
know much of the real substance of events.” The doctor shook his own
head, mock-sadly. “The Nabbanai Imperium was founded—or declared to
be founded—eleven-hundred and sixty-whatever-it-was years ago, by
Tiyagaris, the first Imperator. At that time the legions of Nabban ruled all
the countries of Men north and south, on both sides of the River
Gleniwent.”
   “But—but Nabban is small!” Simon was astonished. “It’s just a small
part of King John’s kingdom!”
   “That, young man,” Morgenes said, “is what we call ‘history.’ Empires
have a tendency to decline; kingdoms to collapse. Given a thousand years
or so, anything can happen—actually, Nabban’s zenith lasted considerably
less than that. What I was getting to, however, is that Nabban once ruled
Men, and Men lived side by side with the Sithi-folk. The king of the Sithi
reigned here in Asu’a—the Hayholt, as we call it. The Erl-king—‘erl’ is an
old word for Sitha—refused humans the right to enter his people’s lands
except by special grant, and the humans—more than a little afraid of the
Sithi—obeyed.”
   “What are Sithi? You said they’re not the Little Folk.”
   Morgenes smiled. “I appreciate your interest, lad—especially when I
haven’t put in killing or maiming once yet today!—but I would appreciate it
even more if you were not so shy with the broom. Dance with her, boy,
dance with her! Look, clean that off, if you will.”
   Morgenes trotted over to the wall and pointed to a patch of soot several
cubits in diameter. It looked very much like a footprint. Simon decided not
to ask, and instead set to sweeping it loose from the white-plastered stone.
   “Ahhhh, many thanks to you. I’ve been wanting to get that down for
months—since last year’s Harrow’s Eve, as a matter of fact. Now, where in
the name of the Lesser Vistrils was I . . . ? Oh, your questions. The Sithi?
Well, they were here first, and perhaps will be here when we’re gone. When
we’re all gone. They are as different from us as Man is from the Animal—
but somewhat similar, too. . . .” The doctor stopped to consider.
   “To be fair, Man and Animal both live a similarly brief span of years in
Osten Ard, and this is not true of Sithi and Man. If the Fair Folk are not
actually deathless, they are certainly much longer-lived than any mortal
man, even our nonagenarian king. It could be they do not die at all, except
by choice or violence—perhaps if you are a Sitha, violence itself might be a
choice. . . .”
   Morgenes trailed off. Simon was staring at him open-mouthed.
   “Oh, shut that jaw, boy, you look like Inch. It’s my privilege to wander in
thought a little bit. Would you rather go back and listen to the Mistress of
Chambermaids?”
   Simon’s mouth closed, and he resumed sweeping the soot off the wall.
He had changed the original footprint shape to something resembling a
sheep; he stopped from time to time to eye it appraisingly. An itch of
boredom made itself known at the back of his neck: he liked the doctor, and
would rather be here than anywhere else—but the old man did go on so!
Maybe if he swept a little more of the top part away it would look like a
dog . . . ? His stomach growled quietly.
   Morgenes went on to explain, in what Simon thought was perhaps
unnecessary detail, about the era of peace between the subjects of the
ageless Erl-king and those of the upstart human Imperators.
   “. . . so, Sithi and Man found a sort of balance,” the old man said. “They
even traded together a little . . .”
   Simon’s stomach rumbled loudly. The doctor smiled a tiny smile and put
back the last onion, which he had just lifted from the table.
   “Men brought spices and dyes from the Southern Islands, or precious
stones from the Grianspog Mountains in Hernystir; in return they received
beautiful things from the Erl-king’s coffers, objects of cunning and
mysterious workmanship.”
   Simon’s patience was at an end. “But what about the shipmen, the
Rimmersmen? What about the iron swords?” He looked about for
something to gnaw on. The last onion? He sidled cautiously over. Morgenes
was facing the window; while he gazed out at the gray noontide, Simon
pocketed the papery brown thing and hurried back to the wall-spot. Much
diminished in size, the splotch now looked like a serpent.
   Morgenes continued without turning away from the window. “I suppose
there has been quite a bit of peaceful-times-and-people in my history
today.” He wagged his head, walking back to his seat. “Peace will soon give
way—never fear.” He shook his head again, and a lock of thin hair settled
across his wrinkled forehead. Simon gnawed furtively at his onion.
   “Nabban’s golden age lasted a little over four centuries, until the earliest
coming of the Rimmersmen to Osten Ard. The Nabbanai Imperium had
begun to turn in on itself. Tiyagaris’ line had finally died out, and every
new Imperator who seized power was another cast of the dice cup; some
were good men who tried to hold the realm together. Others, like Crexis the
Goat, were worse than any northern reavers. And some, like Enfortis, were
just weak.
   “During Enfortis’ reign the iron-wielders came. Nabban decided to
withdraw from the north altogether. They fell back across the river
Gleniwent so quickly that many of the northern frontier outposts found
themselves entirely deserted, left behind to join the oncoming Rimmersmen
or die.
   “Hmmm . . . Am I boring you, boy?”
   Simon, leaning against the wall, jerked himself upright to face
Morgenes’ knowing smile.
   “No, Doctor, no! I was just closing my eyes to listen better. Go on!”
   Actually, all of these names, names, names were making him a bit
drowsy . . . and he wished the doctor would hurry along to the parts with
battles in them. But he did like to be the only one in the entire castle to
whom Morgenes was speaking. The chambermaids didn’t know anything
about these kind of things . . . men things. What did maids or serving girls
know about armies, and flags, and swords . . . ?
    “Simon?”
    “Oh! Yes? Go on!” He whirled to sweep off the last of the wall-blot as
the doctor resumed. The wall was clean. Had he finished without knowing?
    “So I will try and make the story a little briefer, lad. As I was saying,
Nabban withdrew its armies from the north, becoming for the first time
purely a southern empire. It was just the beginning of the end, of course; as
time passed, the Imperium folded itself up just like a blanket, smaller and
smaller until today they are nothing more than a duchy—a peninsula with
its few attendant islands. What in the name of Paldir’s Arrow are you
doing?”
    Simon was contorting himself like a hound trying to scratch a difficult
spot. Yes, there was the last of the wall dirt: a snake-shaped smear across
the back of his shirt. He had leaned against it. He turned sheepishly to
Morgenes, but the doctor only laughed and continued.
    “Without the Imperial garrisons, Simon, the north was in chaos. The
shipmen had captured the northernmost part of the Frostmarch, naming
their new home Rimmersgard. Not content with that, the Rimmersmen were
fanning out southward, sweeping all before them in a bloody advance. Put
those folios in a stack against the wall, will you?
    “They robbed and ruined other Men, making captives of many, but the
Sithi they deemed evil creatures; with fire and cold iron they hunted the
Fair Folk to their death everywhere . . . careful with that one, there’s a good
lad.”
    “Over here, Doctor?”
    “Yes—but, Bones of Anaxos, don’t drop them! Set them down! If you
knew the terrible midnight hours I spent rolling dice in an Utanyeat
graveyard to get my hands on them . . . ! There! Much better.
    “Now the people of Hernystir—a proud, fierce people whom even the
Nabbanai Imperators never really conquered—were not at all willing to
bend their necks to Rimmersgard. They were horrified by what the
northerners were doing to the Sithi. The Hernystiri had been of all Men the
closest to Fair Folk—there is still visible today the mark of an ancient trade
road between this castle and the Taig at Hernysadharc. The lord of
Hernystir and the Erl-king made desperate compact, and for a while held
the northern tide at bay.
   “But even combined, their resistance could not last forever. Fingil, king
of the Rimmersmen, swept down across the Frostmarch over the borders of
the Erl-king’s territory . . .” Morgenes smiled sadly. “We’re coming to the
end now, young Simon, never fear, coming to the end of it all. . . .
   “In the year 663 the two great hosts came to the plains of Ach Samrath,
the Summerfield, north of the River Gleniwent. For five days of terrible,
merciless carnage the Hernystiri and the Sithi held back the might of the
Rimmersmen. On the sixth day, though, they were set on treacherously
from their unprotected flank by an army of men from the Thrithings, who
had long coveted the riches of Erkynland and the Sithi for their own. They
made a fearful charge under cover of darkness. The defense was broken, the
Hernystiri chariots smashed, the White Stag of the House of Hern trampled
into the bloody dirt. It is said that ten thousand men of Hernystir died in the
field that day. No one knows how many Sithi fell, but their losses were
grievous, too. Those Hernystiri who survived fled back to the forest of their
home. In Hernystir, Ach Samrath is today a name only for hatred and loss.”
   “Ten thousand!” Simon whistled. His eyes shone with the terror and
grandness of it all.
   Morgenes noted the boy’s expression with a small grimace, but did not
comment.
   “That was the day that Sithi mastery in Osten Ard came to an end, even
though it took three long years of siege before Asu’a fell to the victorious
northerners.
   “If not for strange, horrible magics worked by the Erl-king’s son, there
would likely have been not a single Sithi to survive the fall of the Castle.
Many did, however, fleeing to the forests, and south to the waters and . . .
and elsewhere.”
   Now Simon’s attention was fixed as though nailed. “And the Erl-king’s
son? What was his name? What kind of magic did he do?”—a sudden
thought—“How about Prester John? I thought you were going to tell me
about the king—our king!”
   “Another day, Simon.” Morgenes fanned his brow with a sheaf of
whisper-thin parchments, although the chamber was quite cool. “There is
much to tell about the dark ages after Asu’a fell, many stories. The
Rimmersmen ruled here until the dragon came. In later years, while the
dragon slept, other men held the castle. Many years and several kings in the
Hayholt, many dark years and many deaths until John came. . . .” He trailed
off, passing a hand over his face as though to brush weariness away.
   “But what about the king of the Sithi’s son?” Simon asked quietly. “What
about the . . . the ‘terrible magic’?”
   “About the Erl-king’s son . . . it is better to say nothing.”
   “But why?”
   “Enough questions, boy!” Morgenes growled, waving his hands. “I am
tired of talking!”
   Simon was offended. He had only been trying to hear the whole story;
why were grown people so easily upset? However, it was best not to boil
the hen who lays golden eggs.
   “I’m sorry, Doctor.” He tried to look contrite, but the old scholar looked
so funny with his pink, flushed monkey-face and his wispy hair sticking up!
Simon felt his lip curling toward a smile. Morgenes saw it, but maintained
his stern expression.
   “Truly, I’m sorry.” No change. What to try next? “Thank you for telling
me the story.”
   “Not a ‘story’!” Morgenes roared. “History! Now be off with you! Come
back tomorrow morning ready to work, for you have still barely begun
today’s work!”
   Simon got up, trying to keep his smile in check, but as he turned to go it
broke loose and wriggled across his face like a ribbon-snake. As the door
closed behind him he heard Morgenes cursing whatever eldritch demons
had hidden his jug of porter.

                                    •••

   Afternoon sunlight was knifing down through chinks in the heavy clouds
as Simon made his way back to the Inner Bailey. On the face of it he
seemed to dawdle and gape, a tall, awkward, red-haired boy in dust-caked
clothes. Inside he was aswarm with strange thoughts, a hive of buzzing,
murmuring desires.
   Look at this castle, he thought—old and dead, stone pressed upon lifeless
stone, a pile of rocks inhabited by small-minded creatures. But it had been
different once. Great things had happened here. Horns had blown, swords
had glittered, great armies had crashed against each other and rebounded
like the waves of the Kynslagh battering the Seagate wall. Hundreds of
years had passed, but it seemed to Simon it was happening just now only
for him, while the slow, witless folk who shared the castle with him crawled
past, thinking of nothing but the next meal, and a nap directly afterward.
   Idiots.
   As he came through the postern gate a glimmer of light caught his eye,
drawing it up to the distant walkway that ringed Hjeldin’s Tower. A girl
stood there, bright and small as a piece of jewelry, her green dress and
golden hair embracing the ray of sunlight as if it had arrowed down from
the sky for her alone. Simon could not see her face, but he was somehow
certain she was beautiful—beautiful and forgiving as the image of the
Immaculate Elysia that stood in the chapel.
   For a moment that flash of green and gold kindled him like a spark on
dry timber. He felt all the bother and resentment that he had carried
disappear, burned away in a hasty second. He was as light and buoyant as
swansdown, prey to any breeze that might carry him away, might waft him
up to that golden gleam.
   Then he looked away from the wonderful faceless girl, down at his own
ragged garments. Rachel was waiting, and his dinner had gotten cold. A
certain indefinable weight climbed back into its accustomed seat, bending
his neck and slumping his shoulders as he trudged toward the servant’s
quarters.