
                       The Tower Window




Novander was sputtering out in wind and delicate snow; Decander
waited patiently, year’s-end in its train.
   King John Presbyter had been taken ill after calling his two sons back to
the Hayholt, and had returned to his shadowed room, again to be
surrounded by leeches, learned doctors, and scolding, fretting body
servants. Bishop Domitis swept in from Saint Sutrin’s, Erchester’s great
church, and set up shop at John’s bedside, shaking the king awake at all
hours to inspect the texture and heft of the royal soul. The old man,
continuing to weaken, bore both pain and priest with gallant stoicism.
   In the tiny chamber next to the king’s own that Towser had occupied for
forty years the sword Bright-Nail lay, oiled and scabbarded, wrapped in fine
linens at the bottom of the jester’s oaken chest.

                                   •••

   Far and wide across the broad face of Osten Ard the word flew: Prester
John was dying. Hernystir in the west and northern Rimmersgard
immediately dispatched delegations to the bedside of stricken Erkynland.
Old Duke Isgrimnur, John’s left-hand companion at the Great Table,
brought fifty Rimmersmen from Elvritshalla and Naarved, the whole
company wrapped head to foot in furs and leather for the winter crossing of
the Frostmarch. Only twenty Hernystiri accompanied King Lluth’s son
Gwythinn, but the bright gold and silver they wore flashed bravely,
outshining the poor cloth of their garments.
   The castle began to come alive with the music of languages long
unheard, Rimmerspakk and Perdruinese and Harcha-tongue. Naraxi’s
rolling island speech floated in the gateyard, and the stables echoed to the
singsong cadences of the Thrithings-men—the grasslanders, as always,
most comfortable around horses. Over these and all others hung the droning
speech of Nabban, the busy tongue of Mother Church and her Aedonite
priests, taking charge as always of the comings and goings of men and their
souls.
   In the tall Hayholt and Erchester below these small armies of foreigners
came together and flowed apart, for the most part without incident.
Although many of these peoples had been ancient enemies, nearly four
score years beneath the High King’s Ward had healed many wounds. More
gills of ale were bought than harsh words traded.
   There was one worrisome exception to this rule of harmony—one
difficult to miss or misunderstand. Everywhere they met, under Hayholt’s
broad gates or in the narrow alleyways of Erchester, Prince Elias’ green-
liveried soldiers and Prince Josua’s gray-shirted retainers jostled and
argued, mirroring in public the private division of the king’s sons. Prester
John’s Erkynguard were called upon to break up several ugly brawls. At
last, one of Josua’s supporters was stabbed by a young Meremund noble, an
intimate of the heir-apparent. Luckily, Josua’s man took no fatal harm—the
blow was a drunken one, and poorly aimed—and the partisans were forced
to heed the rebukes of the older courtiers. The troops of the two princes
returned to cold stares and disdainful sneers; open bloodshed was averted.
   These were strange days in Erkynland, and in all of Osten Ard, days
freighted with equal measures of sorrow and excitement. The king was not
dead, but it seemed he soon would be. The whole world was changing—
how could anything remain the same once Prester John no longer sat the
Dragonbone Chair?
   “. . . Udunsday: dream . . . Drorsday: better . . . Frayday: best . . .
Satrinsday: marketday . . . Sunday—rest!”
   Down the creaking stairs two at a clip, Simon sang the old rhyme at the
top of his voice. He almost knocked over Sophrona the Linen Mistress as
she led a squadron of blanket-burdened maids in at the Pine Garden door.
She threw herself back against the doorjamb with a little shriek as Simon
pounded by, then waved a skinny fist at his fast-departing back.
   “I’ll tell Rachel!” she shouted. Her charges stifled laughter.
   Who cared for Sophrona? Today was Satrinsday—market day—and
Judith the cook had given Simon two pennies to buy some things for her,
and a fithing piece—glorious Satrinsday!—to spend on himself. The coins
made a lovely, suggestive clink in his leather purse as he spiraled out
through the castle’s acres of long, circular courtyards, out the Inner Bailey
gate to Middle Bailey, nearly empty now since its residents, the soldiers and
the artisans, were mostly on duty or at market.
   In Outer Bailey animals milled in the commons yard, bumping miserably
together in the cold, guarded by herders who looked scarcely more cheerful.
Simon bustled along the rows of low houses, storage rooms, and animal
sheds, many of them so old and overgrown with winter-naked ivy that they
seemed only warty growths on the High Keep’s inner walls.
   The sun was glinting through the clouds on the carvings that swarmed
the mighty chalcedony face of the Nearulagh Gate. As he slowed to a
puddle-dodging trot, staring open-mouthed at the intricate depictions of
King John’s victory over Ardrivis—the battle that had brought Nabban at
last under the royal hand—Simon heard the tumult of swift hooves and the
shrill squeak of cart wheels. He looked up in horror to find himself faced
with the white, rolling eyes of a horse, mud gouting from beneath its hooves
as it plunged through the Nearulagh Gate. Simon flung himself out of the
way and felt wind on his face as the horse thundered by, the cart drawn
behind it pitching wildly. He had a brief glimpse of the driver, dressed in a
dark hooded cloak lined with scarlet. The man’s eyes raked him as the cart
hurtled past—they were black and shiny, like the cruel button-orbs of a
shark; although the contact was fleeting, Simon felt almost that the driver’s
gaze burned him. He reeled back, clutching at the stone facing of the gate,
and watched as the cart disappeared around the track of Outer Bailey.
Chickens squawked and flapped in its wake, except for those that lay
crushed and bloody in the wagon’s ruts. Muddied feathers drifted to the
ground.
   “Here, boy, not hurt are you?” One of the gatewarders peeled Simon’s
trembling hand from the carvings and set him back upright. “Get on with
you, then.”
   Snow swirled in the air and stuck melting to his cheeks as he walked
down the long hill toward Erchester. The chink of the coins in his pocket
now played to a slower, wobbly-kneed rhythm.
   “That priest is mad as the moon,” Simon heard the warder say to his gate
companion. “Were he not Prince Elias’ man . . .”
   Three little children following their toiling mother up the damp hill-path
pointed at long-legged Simon as he passed, laughing at the expression on
his pale face.

                                    •••

   Main Row was roofed all over with stitched skins that stretched across
the wide thoroughfare from building to building. At each waycrossing were
set great stone fire-cairns, most—but certainly not all—of their smokes
billowing up through holes in the roof-tenting. Snow fluttering down
through the chimney holes sizzled and hissed in the hot air. Warming
themselves by the flames or strolling and talking—all the while
surreptitiously examining the goods displayed on every side—Erchester and
Hayholt folk mixed with those of the outer fiefs, eddying together in and
out of the wide central row which ran two full leagues from the Nearulagh
Gate to Battle Square at the city’s far end. Caught up in the press, Simon
found his spirits reviving. What should he care for a drunken priest? After
all, it was market day!
   Today the usual army of marketers and shrill-voiced hawkers, wide-eyed
provincials, gamblers, cutpurses, and musicians was swelled by the soldiery
of the various missions to the dying king. Rimmersman, Hernystiri,
Warinstenner or Perdruinese, their swagger and bright garb caught Simon’s
jackdaw fancy. He followed one group of blue and gold clad Nabbanai
legionaries, admiring their strut and easy superiority, understanding without
language the offhand way they insulted each other. He was edging up
closer, hoping for a clear look at the short stabbing-swords they wore
scabbarded high on their waists, when one of them—a bright-eyed soldier
wearing a thin, dark mustache—turned and saw him.
   “Heá, brothers!” he said with a grin, grabbing at one of his fellows’ arm,
“Look now! A young sneaking thief, I wager, and one who has his eye on
your purse, Turis!”
   Both men squared to face Simon, and the heavy, bearded one called Turis
gave the youth a grim stare. “Did he touch it, then I would kill,” he
growled. His command of the Westerling speech was not as sure as the first
man’s; he seemed to lack the other’s humor as well.
   Three other legionaries had now come back to join the first pair. They
gradually closed in until Simon felt like a winded fox.
   “What’s here, Gelles?” one of the new arrivals asked Turis’ companion.
“Hué fauge? Did this one steal?”
   “Nai, nai . . .” Gelles chuckled, “I was but having sport with Turis.
Skinny-one here did nothing.”
   “I have my own purse!” Simon said indignantly. He untied it from his
belt and waved it in the soldier’s smirking faces. “I am no thief! I live in the
king’s household! Your king!” The soldiers all laughed.
   “Heá, listen to him!” Gelles shouted, “Our king he says, so very bold!”
   Simon could see now that the young legionary was drunk. Some—but
not all—of his fascination turned to disgust.
   “Heá, lads,” Gelles waggled his eyebrows, “‘Mulveiz-nei cenit
drenisend,’ they say—let us beware this pup, then, and let him sleep!”
Another round of hilarity followed. Simon, red-faced, secured his purse and
turned to go.
   “Goodbye, castle-mouse!” one of the soldiers called mockingly. Simon
did not turn or speak, but hurried away.
   He had gone past one of the fire-cairns and out from under the Main Row
awnings when he felt a hand upon his shoulder. He whirled, thinking that
the Nabban-men had returned to insult him further, but instead found a
plump man with a weather-hardened pink face. The stranger wore the gray
robe and tonsure of a mendicant friar.
   “Your pardon, my young lad,” he said, with a Hernystirman’s crackling
burr, “I only wished to find out if you were safe, then, if those goirach
fellows had done you harm.” The stranger reached out to Simon and patted
him, as if searching for damage. His heavy-lidded eyes, fitted round about
with wrinkles marking the curves of a frequent smile, nevertheless held
something back: a deeper shadow, troubling but not frightening. Simon
realized he was staring, almost against his will, and shied back.
   “No, thank you, Father,” he said, startled into the patterns of formality.
“They were just making sport of me. No harm.”
   “Good that is, very good . . . Ah, forgive me, I have not introduced
myself. I am Brother Cadrach ec-Crannhyr, of the Vilderivan Order.” He
pulled a small, self-deprecatory smile. His breath smelled of wine. “I came
with Prince Gwythinn and his men. Who might you be?”
   “Simon. I live in the Hayholt.” He made a vague gesture toward the
castle.
   The friar smiled again, saying nothing, then turned to watch a Hyrkaman
walk by, dressed in bright, disparate colors and leading a muzzled bear on a
chain. When the duo had passed, Cadrach returned his small, sharp eyes to
Simon.
   “There are some that say the Hyrkas can talk to animals, have you heard?
Especially their horses. And that the animals understand perfectly.” The
friar gave a mocking shrug, as if to show that a man of God naturally would
not believe such nonsense.
   Simon did not reply. He, of course, had also heard such tales related
about the wild Hyrkamen. Shem Horsegroom swore the stories were pure
truth. The Hyrkas were often seen at market, where they sold beautiful
horses at outrageous prices, and befuddled the villagers with tricks and
puzzles. Thinking about them—especially their less-than-honest reputation
—Simon put a hand down and grabbed his leather purse, reassuring himself
by the feel of the coins inside.
   “Thank you for your help, Father,” he said at last—although he could not
actually remember the man doing anything helpful. “I must go now. I have
spices to buy.”
   Cadrach looked at him for a long moment, as if trying to remember
something, a clue to which might be hidden in Simon’s face. At last he said:
“I would like to ask you a favor, young man.”
   “What?” Simon said suspiciously.
   “As I mentioned, I am a stranger in your Erchester. Perhaps you would
be good enough to guide me around for a short while, just to help me. You
could then go on your way, having done a good turn.”
   “Oh.” Simon felt somewhat relieved. His first impulse was to say no—it
was so rarely that he got an afternoon to himself at the market. But how
often did you get to talk with an Aedonite monk from pagan Hernystir?
Also, this Brother Cadrach did not seem like the type who only wanted to
lecture you about sin and damnation. He looked the man over again, but the
monk’s face was unreadable.
   “Well, I suppose so—certainly. Come along . . . do you want to see the
Nascadu-dancers in Battle Square . . . ?”
   Cadrach was an interesting companion. Although he talked freely, telling
Simon of the cold journey from Hernysadharc to Erchester with Prince
Gwythinn, and made frequent jests about the passersby and their various
exotic costumes, still he seemed restrained, watching always for something
even as he laughed at his own stories. He and Simon wandered the market
for a good part of the afternoon, looking at the tables of cakes and dried
vegetables that stood against the shop walls of Main Row, smelling the
warm smells of the bread bakers and chestnut vendors. Noting Simon’s
wistful gaze, the friar insisted they stop and buy a rough straw basket of
roasted nuts, which he kindly paid for, giving the chap-faced chestnut man a
half-fithing piece nimbly plucked from a pocket in his gray cassock. After
burning fingers and tongues trying to eat the nut meats they conceded
defeat and stood watching a comical argument between a wine merchant
and a juggler blocking his wine-shop doorway while they waited for their
purchase to cool.
   Next they halted to watch a Usires Play being enacted for a gaggle of
shrieking children and fascinated adults. The puppets bobbed and bowed,
Usires in his white gown being chased by the Imperator Crexis wearing
goat-horns and a beard, and waving a long, barb-headed pike. At last Usires
was captured and hung upon the Execution Tree; Crexis, his voice high and
shrill, leaped about poking and tormenting the tree-nailed Savior. The
children, wildly excited, shouted abuse at the capering Imperator.
   Cadrach nudged Simon. “Do you see?” he asked, pointing a thick finger
toward the front of the puppet-stage. The curtain that hung from the stage to
the ground billowed, as if in a strong breeze. Cadrach nudged Simon again.
   “Would you not say that this is a fine representation of Our Lord?” he
asked, never once taking his eyes from the flapping cloth. Above, Crexis
jigged and Usires suffered. “While man plays out his show, the Manipulator
remains unseen; we know Him not by sight, but by the ways His puppets
move. And occasionally the curtain stirs, that hides Him from His faithful
audience. Ah, but we are grateful even for just that movement behind the
curtain—grateful!”
   Simon stared; at last Cadrach looked away from the puppet show and
met his gaze. A strange, sad smile crimped the corner of the friar’s mouth;
for once the look in his eyes seemed to match.
   “Ah, boy,” he said, “and what should you know of religious matters,
anyway?”

                                    •••

   They strolled for some while longer before Brother Cadrach at last took
his leave with many thanks to the young man for his hospitality. Simon
continued to walk aimlessly long after the monk was gone, and the patches
of sky that could been seen through the roof-tenting were filmed with early
darkness before he remembered his errand.
   At the spice-merchant’s stall he discovered that his purse was gone.
   His heart thumped triple-time as he thought back in panic. He knew that
he had felt it swinging on his belt when he and Cadrach had stopped to buy
chestnuts, but could summon no memories of having it later in the
afternoon. Whenever it had disappeared, though, it was definitely gone now
—along with not just his own fithing piece, but also the two pennies
entrusted to him by Judith!
   He searched the market vainly until the sky-holes had gone black as an
old kettle. The snow that he had barely felt before seemed very cold and
very wet as he returned, empty-handed, to the castle.

                                    •••

   Worse than any beating—as Simon discovered when he came home
without spices or money—was the look of disappointment that sweet, fat,
flour-dusted Judith gave him. Rachel also used this most unfair of gambits,
punishing him with nothing more painful than an expression of disgust at
his childishness and a promise that he would “work fingers to the nubbin”
earning the money back. Even Morgenes, whom Simon went to half in hope
of sympathy, seemed faintly surprised at the youth’s carelessness. All in all,
although spared a thrashing, he had never felt lower or more sorry for
himself.




    Sunday came and went, a dark, slushy day in which most of the
Hayholt’s staff seemed to be at chapel saying a prayer for King John—that,
or telling Simon to go away. He had exactly the kind of scratchy, irritable,
kick-things-across-the-floor sort of feeling that could usually be soothed by
visiting Morgenes or trekking out of doors to do some exploring. The
doctor, however, was busy—locked in with Inch, working on something
that he said was large, dangerous, and likely to catch fire; Simon would not
be needed for anything. The weather outside was so cold and dismal that
even in his misery he could not convince himself to go a-roving. Instead, he
spent the endless afternoon with the chandler’s fat apprentice Jeremias,
tossing rocks from one of the turrets of the Inner Bailey wall and arguing in
a desultory way as to whether the fish in the moat froze during the winter
or, if not, where they went until Spring’s arrival.
    The chill outside—as well as the different kind of chill in the servant’s
quarters—still prevailed Moonday when he arose, feeling weedy and
unpleasant. Morgenes also seemed in a damp and unresponsive mood, and
so when Simon had finished his chores in the doctor’s chambers he filched
some bread and cheese from the pantry larder and went off to be by himself.
    For a while he moped by the Hall of Records in the Middle Bailey,
listening to the dry, insectlike sounds of the Writing-Priests, but after an
hour he began to feel as though it was his own skin on which the scribes’
pens were scratching and scratching and scratching. . . .
    He decided to take his dinner and climb the stairs of Green Angel Tower,
something he had not done since the weather had begun to turn. Since
Barnabas the sexton would as gladly chase him off as go to Heaven, he
resolved to bypass the chapel route to the tower entirely, taking instead his
own secret path to the upper floors. Tying his meal securely in his
handkerchief, he set out.
                                    •••

    Walking through the seemingly endless halls of the Chancelry, passing
continuously from covered passage to open courtyard and back under cover
again—this part of the castle was dotted with small, enclosed yards—he
superstitiously avoided looking up at the tower. Eminently slender and pale,
it dominated the northeastern corner of the Hayholt like a birch tree in a
rock garden, so impossibly tall and delicate that from ground level it almost
appeared to be standing on some far hillside, miles and miles beyond the
castle’s wall. Standing beneath he could hear it shudder in the wind, as
though it were a lute string tight-cinched on some celestial peg.
    The first four stories of Green Angel Tower looked no different than any
of the other hundreds of varied structures of the castle. Past masters of the
Hayholt had cloaked its slim base in granite outwalls and battlements—
whether out of legitimate desire for improved security or because the
alienness of the tower was unsettling, no one could know. Above the level
of the encircling bailey wall the armoring stopped; the tower thrust nakedly
upward, a beautiful albino creature escaping its drab cocoon. Balconies and
windows in strangely abstract patterns were cut directly into the stone’s
glossy surface, like the carved whalefish teeth Simon often saw at market.
At the tower’s pinnacle shimmered a distant flare of copper-gold and green:
the Angel herself, one arm outstretched as if in a gesture of farewell, the
other shading her eyes as she stared into the eastern distance.
    The huge, noisy Chancelry was even more confounding than usual today.
Father Helfcene’s cassocked minions dashed back and forth from one
chamber to another, or huddled for shivering discussions in the chill,
snowflecked air of the courtyards. Several, bearing rolled papers and
distracted expressions, tried to commandeer Simon for errands to the Hall
of Records, but he bluffed his way through, protesting a mission for Doctor
Morgenes.
    In the throne room antechamber he halted, pretending to admire the vast
mosaics while he waited for the last of the Chancelry priests to hurry
through to the chapel beyond. When his moment came, he levered the door
open and slid through into the throne room.
    The huge hinges creaked, then went silent. Simon’s own footsteps
echoed and re-echoed, then stopped, fading at last into the deep, breathing
quiet. No matter how many times he snuck through this room—for several
years he had been, as far as he knew, the only castle resident who dared
enter it—it never seemed less than awe-inspiring.
    Just last month, after King John’s unexpected rising, Rachel and her crew
had finally been allowed past the forbidden threshold; they had indulged
themselves with a two-week assault on years of dust and grit, on broken
glass and birds’ nests and the webs of spiders long since gone to their eight-
legged ancestors. But even thoroughly cleaned, with its flagstones mopped,
its walls washed down, and some—but not all—of the banners shed of their
armor of dust, despite relentless and implacable tidying, the throne room
emanated a certain age and stillness. Time here seemed bound only to the
measured tread of antiquity.

                                     •••

   The dais stood at the great room’s far end, in a pool of light that poured
down from a figured window in the vaulted ceiling. Upon it the
Dragonbone Chair stood like a strange altar—untenanted, surrounded by
bright, dancing motes of dust, flanked by the statues of the Hayholt’s six
High Kings.
   The bones of the chair were huge, thicker than Simon’s legs, polished so
that they gleamed dully like burnished stone. With a few exceptions they
had been cut and fitted in such a way that, although their size was evident, it
was difficult to guess in which part of the great fire-worm’s mighty carcass
they had once sheltered. Only the chair back, a great seven-cubit fan of
curving yellow ribs behind the king’s velvet cushions, reaching far above
Simon’s head, could be seen immediately for what it was—that and the
skull. Perched atop the back of the great seat, jutting far enough to serve as
an awning—if more than a thin film of sunlight ever penetrated the
shadowed throne room—were the brain-case and jaws of the dragon
Shurakai. The eye-holes were broken black windows, the teeth curving
spikes as long as Simon’s hands. The dragon’s skull was the color of old
parchment, and webbed with tiny cracks, but there was something alive
about it—terribly, wonderfully alive.
   In fact, there was an astonishing and holy aura about this entire room that
went far beyond Simon’s understanding. The throne of heavy, yellowed
bones, the massive black figures guarding an empty chair in a high,
deserted chamber, all seemed filled with some dread power. All eight
inhabitants of the room, the scullion, the statues, and the huge eyeless skull,
seemed to hold their breath.
    These stolen moments filled Simon with a quiet, almost fearful, ecstasy.
Perhaps the malachite kings but waited with black, stony patience for the
boy to touch a blasphemous commoner’s hand to the dragonbone seat,
waited . . . waited . . . and then, with a horrible creaking noise, they would
come to life! He shivered with nervous pleasure at his own imaginings and
stepped lightly forward, surveying the dark faces. Their names had been so
familiar once, when they had been strung-together nonsense in a child’s
rhyme, a rhyme Rachel—Rachel? Could that be right?—had taught him
when he was a giggling ape of four years or so. Could he remember them
still?
    If his own childhood seemed so long ago, he suddenly wondered, how
must it feel to Prester John, who wore so many decades? Mercilessly clear,
as when Simon remembered past humiliations, or soft and insubstantial,
like stories of the glorious past? When you were old, did your memories
crowd out your other thoughts? Or did you lose them—your childhood,
your hated enemies, your friends?
    How did that old song go? Six kings . . .

                 Six Kings have ruled in Hayholt’s broad halls
                 Six masters have stridden her mighty stone walls
                 Six mounds on the cliff over deep Kynslagh-bay
                 Six kings will sleep there until Doom’s final day

  That was it!

                 Fingil first, named the Bloody King
                 Flying out of the North on war’s red wing

                 Hjeldin his son, the Mad King dire
                 Leaped to his death from the haunted spire

                 Ikferdig next, the Burned King hight
              He met the fire-drake by dark of night

              Three northern kings, all dead and cold
              The North rules no more in lofty Hayholt

   Those were the three Rimmersgard kings on the left of the throne. Wasn’t
Fingil the one Morgenes spoke of, the leader of the dreadful army? The one
who killed the Sithi? So, on the right side of the yellowed bones the rest
must be . . .

              The Heron King Sulis, called Apostate
              Fled Nabban, but in Hayholt he met his fate

              The Hernystir Holly King, old Tethtain
              Came in at the gate, but not out again

              Last, Eahlstan Fisher King, in lore most high
              The dragon he woke, and in Hayholt he died . . .

   Hah! Simon stared at the Heron King’s sad, pinched face and gloated.
My memory is better than most people think—better than that of most
moon-calves! Of course, now there was at last a seventh king in the Hayholt
—old Prester John. Simon wondered if someone would add King John to
the song someday.
   The sixth statue, closest to the throne’s right arm, was Simon’s favorite:
the only native Erkynlander who had ever sat on the Hayholt’s great seat.
He moved closer to look into the deep-cut eyes of Saint Eahlstan—called
Eahlstan Fiskerne because he came from the fisher-people of the Gleniwent,
called The Martyr because he too had been slain by the firedrake Shurakai,
the creature destroyed at last by Prester John.
   Unlike the Burned King on the throne’s other side, the Fisher King’s face
was not carved in a twist of fear and doubt: rather the sculptor had brought
radiant faith into the stony features, had given opaque eyes the illusion of
seeing faraway things. The long-dead artisan had made Eahlstan humble
and reverent, but had also made him bold. In his secret thoughts, Simon
often imagined that his own fisherman father might have looked like this.
   Staring, Simon felt a sudden coldness on his hand. He was touching the
Chair’s bone armrest! A scullion touching the throne! He snatched his
fingers away—wondering all the while how even the dead substance of
such a fiery beast could feel so chill—and stumbled back a step.
   It seemed for a heart-seizing moment that the statues had begun to lean
toward him, shadows stretching on the tapestried wall, and he skittered
backward. When nothing resembling actual movement followed, he
straightened himself with what dignity he could, bowed to Kings and Chair,
and backed across the stone floor. Searching with his hand—calmly, calmly,
he thought to himself, don’t be a frightened fool—he at last found the door
into the standing room, his original destination. With a cautious look back
at the reassuringly immobile tableau, he slipped through.
   Behind the standing room’s heavy tapestry, thick red velvet embroidered
with festival scenes, a staircase inside the wall mounted to a privy at the top
of the throne room’s southern gallery. Chiding himself for his nervousness
of moments before, he climbed it. At the top it was a simple enough matter
to squeeze out of the privy’s long window-slit and onto the wall that ran
beneath. The trick, however, was a little more difficult now than when he
had been here last in Septander: the stones were snow-slippery, and there
was a determined breeze. Fortunately the wall top was wide; Simon
negotiated it carefully.
   Now came the part that he liked best. The corner of this wall came out
within only five or six feet of the broad lee of Green Angel Tower’s fourth-
floor turret. Pausing, he could almost hear the bray of trumpets, the clash of
knights battling on the decks below him as he prepared to leap through the
fierce wind from mast to burning mast. . . .
   Whether his foot slipped a little as he jumped, or his attention was
distracted by the imaginary sea-skirmish below, Simon landed badly on the
edge of the turret. He caught his knee a tremendous crack on the stone,
nearly sliding back and off, which would have dropped him two long
fathoms onto the low wall at the tower’s base or into the moat. The sudden
realization of his peril spurred his heart into a terrified gallop. Instead he
managed to slide down into the space between the turret’s upstanding
merlons, crawling forward to slip down onto the floor of long boards.
   A light snow sifted down as he sat, feeling horribly foolish, and hugged
his throbbing knee. It hurt like sin, betrayal, and treachery; if he had not
been conscious of how childish he must already seem, he would have cried.
   At last he climbed to his feet and limped into the tower. One piece of
luck, anyway: no one had heard his painful landing. His disgrace was his
alone. He felt in his pocket—the bread and cheese were rather nastily
flattened, but still eatable. That, too, was a small solace.

                                     •••

   Climbing stairs on his aching knee was an effort, but it was no good
getting into Green Angel Tower, tallest building in Erkynland—probably in
all of Osten Ard—and then not getting up any higher than the Hayholt’s
main walls.
   The tower staircase was low and narrow, the steps made of a clean,
smooth white stone unlike any other in the castle, slippery to the touch but
sure beneath one’s feet. The castle folk said that this tower was the only part
of the original Sithi stronghold that remained unchanged. Doctor Morgenes
had once told Simon that this was untrue. Whether that meant that the tower
had indeed been changed, or simply that other unsullied remnants of old
Asu’a still remained, the doctor—in his maddening style—would not say.
   Having climbed for several minutes, Simon could see from the windows
that he was already higher than Hjeldin’s Tower. The somewhat sinister
domed column where the Mad King had long ago met his death gazed up at
Green Angel across the expanse of the throne room roof, as a jealous dwarf
might stare at his prince when no one was looking.
   The stone facing on the inside of the stairwell was different here: a soft
fawn color, traced across with minute, puzzling designs in sky blue. Turning
his attention away from Hjeldin’s Tower, he stopped for a moment where
the light of a high window shone on the wall, but when he tried to follow
the course of one of the delicate blue scrolls it made his head dizzy and he
gave up.
   At last, when it seemed he had been climbing painfully for hours, the
staircase opened out onto the shiny white floor of the bell tower, this, too,
constructed from the unusual stair-stone. Although the tower stretched up
another near-hundred cubits, tapering to the Angel herself perched on the
cloudy horizon, the staircase ended here where the great bronze bells hung
row by row from the vaulted rafters like solemn green fruit. The bell
chamber itself was open on all sides to the cold air, so that when Green
Angel’s chimes sang from its high-arched windows the whole countryside
might hear.
   Simon stood with his back against one of the six pillars of dark, smooth,
rock-solid wood that spanned floor to ceiling. As he chewed his crust of
bread he looked out across the western vista, where the Kynslagh’s waters
rolled eternally against the Hayholt’s massive sea wall. Although the day
was dark, and snowflakes danced crazily before him, Simon was startled by
the clarity with which the world below rose to his eyes. Many small boats
rode the Kynslagh’s swells, lake men in black cloaks bent stolidly over their
oars. Beyond, he thought he could dimly make out the place where the river
Gleniwent issued out of the lake at the start of its long journey to the ocean,
a winding course of half a hundred miles, past dock-towns and farms. Out
of Gleniwent, in the arms of the sea herself, Warinsten island watched the
river mouth; beyond Warinsten to the west lay nothing but uncountable,
uncharted leagues of ocean.
   He tested his sore knee and decided for the moment against sitting down,
which would necessitate rising again. He pulled his hat down over his ears,
which were reddening and stinging in the wind, and started in on a piece of
crumbling cheese. To his right, but far past the limits of his vision, were the
meadows and jutting hills of Ach Samrath, the outermost marches of the
kingdom of Hernystir, and the site of the terrible battle Morgenes had
described. On his left hand, across the broad Kynslagh, rolled the
Thrithings—grasslands seemingly without end. Eventually, of course, they
did end: beyond lay Nabban, Firannos Bay and its islands, and the marshy
Wran country . . . all places Simon had never seen and most likely never
would.
   Growing bored at last with the unchanging Kynslagh and imaginings of
the unseeable South, he limped to the other side of the bell chamber. Seen
from the center of the room, where no details of the land below were
visible, the swirling, featureless cloud-darkness was a gray hole into
nowhere, and the tower was momentarily a ghost-ship adrift on a foggy,
empty sea. Wind howled and sang around the open window frames; the
bells hummed faintly, as if the storm had driven small, frightened spirits
into their bronze skins.
   Simon reached the low sill and leaned out to look at the mad jumble of
the Hayholt’s roofs below him. At first the wind tugged as though it wished
to catch him up and toss him, like a kitten sporting with a dead leaf. He
tightened his grip on the wet stone, and soon the wind eased. He smiled:
from this vantage point the Hayholt’s magnificent hodgepodge of roofs—
each a different height and style, each with its forest of chimney pots,
rooftrees, and domes—looked like a yard full of odd, square animals. They
sprawled half-atop one another, struggling for space like hogs at their feed.
   Shorter only than the two towers, the dome of the castle chapel
dominated the Inner Bailey, colorful windows draped in sleet. The keep’s
other buildings, the residences, dining hall, throne room and chancelry,
were each one of them stacked and squeezed with additions, mute evidence
of the castle’s diverse tenantry. The two outer baileys and the massive
curtain wall, descending concentrically down the hill, were similarly
cluttered. The Hayholt itself had never expanded past the outwall; the
people crowding in built upward, or divided what they already had into
smaller and smaller portions.
   Beyond the keep the town of Erchester stretched out in street after
careless street of low houses, wrapped in a mantle of white drifts; only the
cathedral reared up from their midst, itself dwarfed by the Hayholt and by
Simon in his sky-tower. Here and there a feather of smoke drifted upward to
shred in the wind.
   Past the city walls Simon could make out the dim, snow-smoothed
outlines of the lich-yard—the old pagan cemetery, a place of ill repute. The
downs beyond it ran almost to the forest’s edge; above their humble
congregation the tall hill called Thisterborg stood as dramatically as the
cathedral in low-roofed Erchester. Simon could not see them, but he knew
that Thisterborg was crowned with a ring of wind-polished rock pillars that
the villagers called the Anger Stones.
   And beyond Erchester, past the lich-yard and downs and stonecapped
Thisterborg, lay the Forest. Aldheorte was its name—Oldheart—and it
stretched outward like the sea, vast, dark, and unknowable. Men lived on its
fringes, even maintained a few roads along its outer edges, but very few
ventured inward beyond its skirts. It was a great, shadowy country in the
middle of Osten Ard; it sent no embassies, and received few visitors. Placed
against its eminence even the huge Circoille, the Combwood of Hernystir in
the west, was a mere copse. There was only one Forest.
   The sea to the West, the Forest to the East; the North and its iron men,
and the land of shattered empires in the South . . . staring out across the face
of Osten Ard, Simon forgot his knee for a while. Indeed, for a time Simon
himself was king of all the known world.

                                     •••

   When the shrouded winter sun had passed the top of the sky, he moved at
last to leave. Straightening his leg forced out a gasp of pain: the knee had
stiffened in the long hour he had stood at the sill. It was obvious that he
would not be able to take his strenuous secret route down from the bell
tower. He would have to chance his luck against Barnabas and Father
Dreosan.
   The long stairway was a misery, but the view from the tower window had
pushed away his other regrets; he did not feel nearly as sorry for himself as
he otherwise might have. The desire to see more of the world glowed within
him like a low-banked fire, warming him to his fingertips. He would ask
Morgenes to tell him more of Nabban and the Southern Islands, and of the
Six Kings.
   At the fourth level, where he had made his original entry, he heard a
sound: someone moving quickly down the stairwell below him. For a
moment he stood still, wondering if he had been discovered—it was not
strictly forbidden to be in the tower, but he had no good reason for his
presence; the sexton would presume guilt. It was strange, though—the
footfalls were receding. Certainly Barnabas or anyone else would not
hesitate to come up and get him, to lead him down by the much-handled
scruff of his neck. Simon continued down the winding stairs; cautiously at
first; then, despite his throbbing knee, faster and faster as his curiosity got
the better of him.
   The staircase ended at last in the huge entry hall of the tower. The hall
was dimly lit, its walls cloaked in shadows and faded tapestries of subjects
probably religious but long since obscured. He paused at the last step, still
concealed in the darkness of the stairwell. There was no sound of footsteps
—or of anything else. He walked as silently as possible across the flagged
floor, every accidental boot-scrape hissing up toward the oak-ribbed ceiling.
The hall’s main door was closed; the only illumination streamed in from
windows above the lintel.
    How could whoever had been on the stairs have opened and closed the
giant door without his knowing? He had easily heard the light footfalls, and
had himself been worrying about the squeak that the large hinges would
make. He turned to again scan the portal-hall.
    There. From beneath the fringed trim of the stained silver tapestry hung
by the stairs, two small, rounded shapes protruded—shoes. As he looked
carefully now, he could see how folds of the old hanging bellied out where
someone hid behind it.
    Balancing on one foot like a heron, he quietly pulled off first one boot,
then the other. Who could it be? Perhaps fat Jeremias had followed him
here to play a trick? Well, if so, Simon would soon show him.
    Bare feet nearly silent on the stones, he crept across the hall until he
stood immediately before the suspicious bump. For a moment, reaching a
hand out to the edge of the hanging, he remembered the strange thing
Brother Cadrach had said about curtains while they had watched the puppet
show. He hesitated, then felt ashamed of his own timidity, and swept the
tapestry aside.
    Instead of flying open to reveal the spy, the massive hanging tore free of
its stays and billowed down like a monstrous, stiffened blanket. Simon had
only a momentary glimpse of a small, startled face before the weight of the
tapestry knocked him to the ground. As he lay cursing and struggling, badly
tangled, a brown-clad figure shot by.
    Simon could hear whoever-it-was struggling with the heavy door as he
himself wrestled the dusty, enveloping fabric. At last he pulled free and
rolled to his feet, moving across the room in a bound to catch the small
figure before it slipped through the partially opened door. He got a firm
handhold on a rough jerkin. The spy was captured, half-in and half-out.
    Simon was angry now, mostly from embarrassment. “Who are you?” he
snarled. “You spier-on-people!” His captive said nothing, but only struggled
harder. Whoever he was, he was not big enough to loosen Simon’s
restraining grasp.
    Fighting to pull the resisting figure back through the doorway—no easy
task—Simon was startled to recognize the sand-colored broadcloth he was
gripping. This must be the young man who had been spying at the door of
the chapel! Simon gave a fierce pull and got the youth’s head and shoulder
back through the doorframe so he could look at him.
   The prisoner was small, and his features were fine, almost sharp: there
was something a shade foxlike in nose and chin, but not unpleasantly so.
His hair was as dark as a crow’s wing. For a moment Simon thought he
might be a Sitha-man, because of his height—he tried to remember Shem’s
stories about not letting go of a Pookah’s foot, and so winning a cauldron of
gold—but before he could spend any of his dream-treasure he saw the fear-
sweat and reddened cheeks and decided that this was no supernatural
creature.
   “What is your name, you?” he demanded. The captured youth tried to
pull free again, but was obviously tiring. After a moment he stopped his
struggling altogether. “Your name?” Simon prompted, this time in a softer
tone.
   “Malachias.” The youth turned away panting.
   “Well, Malachias, why are you following me?” He gave a little shake to
the youth’s shoulder, to remind him just who had captured whom.
   The youth turned and stared sullenly. His eyes were quite dark.
   “I wasn’t spying on you!” he said vehemently.
   As the boy averted his face once more, Simon was struck by a feeling
that he had seen something familiar in this Malachias’ face, something he
should recognize.
   “Who are you then, sirrah?” Simon asked, and reached out to turn the
boy’s chin toward him. “Do you work in the stables—work somewhere here
in the Hayholt?”
   Before he could bring the face around to look at it once more, Malachias
suddenly put both hands in the middle of Simon’s chest and gave a
surprisingly hard push. He lost his grip on the youth’s jerkin and staggered
backward, then fell on his seat. Before he could even attempt to rise,
Malachias had whisked through the doorway, pulling it shut behind him
with a loud, reverberating squeal of bronze hinges.
   Simon was still sitting on the stone floor—sore knee, sore rump, and
mortally wounded dignity clamoring for attention—when the sexton
Barnabas came in out of the Chancelry hall to investigate the noise. He
stopped as if stunned in the doorway, looking from Simon bootless on the
floor to the torn and crumpled tapestry in front of the stairwell, then turned
his stare back to Simon. Barnabas said not a word, but a vein began to
drumbeat high on each temple, and his brow beetled downward until his
eyes were the merest slits.
   Simon, routed and massacred, could only sit and shake his head, like a
drunkard who had tripped over his own jug and landed upon the Lord
Mayor’s cat.