
                    The Cairn on the Cliffs




Simon’s punishment for his most recent crime was suspension from his
new apprenticeship and confinement to the servant’s quarters.
   For days he strode the boundaries of his prison, from the scullery to the
linens room and back again, restless as a hooded kestrel.
   I have done this to myself, he sometimes thought. I’m just as stupid as
the Dragon says I am.
   Why do they all make such trouble for me? he fumed at other moments.
Anyone would think I was a wild animal that can’t be trusted.
   Rachel, with a form of mercy in mind, found a series of petty tasks to
which he could turn his hand; the days did not pass as excruciatingly slowly
as they might have, but to Simon it seemed only more proof that he was to
be a draft horse forever. He would fetch and haul until he was too old to
labor any longer, then be taken out back and knocked on the head with
Shem’s splintered mallet.
   Meanwhile the final days of Novander crept by, and Decander sidled in
like a sneak thief.

                                   •••

   At the end of the new month’s second week, Simon was given his
freedom—such as it was. He was forbidden Green Angel Tower and certain
other favorite haunts; he was allowed to resume service for the doctor, but
given additional afternoon chores which required him to return promptly at
dinnertime to the servant’s quarters. Even these short visits, however, were
a grand improvement. In fact, it seemed that Morgenes was more and more
coming to rely on Simon. The doctor taught him many things about the uses
and care of the fantastic variety of oddments littering the workshop.
   He was also, painfully, learning to read. It was infinitely more laborious
than sweeping floors or washing dusty alembics and beakers, but Morgenes
drove him through it with a determined hand, saying that without letters
Simon could never be a useful apprentice.

                                    •••

   On Saint Tunath’s Day, Decander the twenty-first, the Hayholt was
bustling with activity. The saint’s day was the last high holiday before
Aedonmansa, and a mighty feast was being laid on. Serving girls set sprigs
of mistletoe and prickly holly around dozens of slender white beeswax
candles—these were all to be lit at sunset, when their flames would pour
light from every window, summoning wandering Saint Tunath in from the
midwinter darkness to bless the castle and its occupants. Other servants
stacked pitchy, new-split logs in the fireplaces, or strewed fresh rushes on
the floor.
   Simon, who had done his best all afternoon to remain unnoticed, was
nevertheless discovered and deputed to go to Doctor Morgenes and find if
he had any oil suitable for polishing things—Rachel’s troops had used up
all the available supply putting a blinding gloss on the Great Table, and
work had barely begun on the Main Hall.
   Simon, who had already spent an entire morning in the doctor’s rooms
reading aloud word by boggling word from a book entitled The Sovran
Remedys of the Wranna Healers, still infinitely preferred anything
Morgenes might want of him to the horrors of Rachel’s steel-glint gaze. He
practically flew from the Main Hall, down the long Chancelry hall, and out
into the Inner Commons beneath Green Angel. He was across the moat-
bridge seconds later like a spar-hawk on the wing; only moments passed
before he was at the doctor’s doors for the second time that day.
   The doctor did not answer his knock for some time, but Simon could
hear voices within. He waited as patiently as he could, picking long
splinters from the weathered doorframe, until at last the old man came.
Morgenes had seen Simon only a short while earlier, but made no comment
on his reappearance. He seemed distracted as he ushered the young man in;
sensing his strange mood, Simon followed quietly down the lamplit
corridor.
   Heavy draperies cloaked the windows. At first, as his eyes adjusted to the
darkness of the chamber, Simon could see no sign of any visitor. Then he
made out a dim shape sitting on a large sea-chest in the corner. The gray-
cloaked man was gazing at the floor, face concealed, but the boy knew him.
   “Forgive me, Prince Josua,” Morgenes said, “this is Simon, my new
apprentice.”
   Josua Lackhand looked up. His pale eyes—were they blue? . . . gray?—
flicked over him with an air of detachment, as a Hyrka trader might
examine a horse he did not intend to buy. After a moment’s inspection the
prince turned his attention back to Morgenes as completely as if Simon had
just winked out of existence. The doctor motioned for the boy to go and
wait at the far end of the room.
   “Highness,” he said to the prince, “I am afraid there is nothing further I
can do. My skills as a doctor and apothecary have been exhausted.” The old
man rubbed his hands together nervously. “Forgive me. You know that I
love the king, and hate to see him suffering, but . . . but some things are not
to be meddled in by such as I—too many possibilities, too many
unforeseeable consequences. One of those things is the passing of a
kingdom.”
   Now Morgenes, whom Simon had not seen in this sort of mood, plucked
an object on a golden chain out of his robe and handled it agitatedly. In
Simon’s knowledge, the doctor—who loved to scorn pretension and show
—had never worn jewelry of any kind, either.
   “But, God curse it, I am not asking you to interfere with the succession!”
Josua’s quiet voice was taut as a bowstring. Having to overhear such a
conversation embarrassed Simon tremendously, but there was nowhere for
him to go without making himself even more conspicuous.
   “I ask you to ‘meddle’ with nothing, Morgenes,” Josua continued, “—
only give me something that will make the old man’s last moments easier. If
he dies tomorrow or next year, Elias is still the High King, and I am still
liege-lord only of Naglimund.” The prince shook his head. “At least think
of the ancient bond you and my father share—you, who have been his
healer, and have studied and chronicled his life for scores of years!” Josua
swept his hand across his body to point at a pile of loose book-leaves
stacked on the doctor’s worm-bored writing desk.
   Writing about the life of the king? Simon wondered. This was the first he
had heard of such a work. The doctor seemed very full of secrets this
morning.
   Josua was still trying. “Can you not take pity? He is like an aged lion at
bay, a great beast being dragged down by jackals! Sweet Usires, the
unfairness . . .”
   “But, Highness . . .” Morgenes had painfully begun when all three in the
room became aware of the sound of running feet and voices in the courtyard
outside. Josua, pale-faced and fever-eyed, was on his feet with his sword
drawn so quickly it seemed to have simply appeared in his left hand. A loud
pounding shook the door. Morgenes, starting forward, was restrained by a
hiss from the prince. Simon felt his heart racing—Josua’s obvious fear was
contagious.
   “Prince Josua! Prince Josua!” someone called. The rapping resumed.
Josua scabbarded his sword with a flick and moved past Doctor Morgenes
into the workshop corridor. He flung the door open to reveal four figures
standing on the courtyard porch. Three were his own gray-liveried soldiers;
the last, who dropped to one knee before the prince, was dressed in a
shining white robe and sandals. Dreamily, Simon recognized him as Saint
Tunath, long-dead subject of countless religious paintings. What could this
mean . . . ?
   “Oh, your Highness . . .” said the kneeling saint, and stopped to catch his
breath. Simon’s mouth—which had begun to quirk upward in a grin as he
realized that this was only another soldier, dressed up to enact the saint’s
part at tonight’s festivities—now froze as he saw the stricken look on the
young man’s face. “Your Highness . . . Josua . . .” the soldier repeated.
   “What is it, Deornoth?” the prince demanded. His voice was strained.
   Deornoth looked up, dark, rough-cut soldier’s hair framed in the white
gleam of his hood. He had in that moment true martyr’s eyes, blasted and
knowing.
   “The king, Lord, your father the king . . . Bishop Domitis said . . . that he
is dead.”
   Soundlessly, Josua pushed past the kneeling man and was gone across
the courtyard, the soldiers trotting behind. After a moment Deornoth rose
too and followed, hands clasped monkishly before him as if the breath of
tragedy had changed imposture to reality. The door swung listlessly in a
cool wind.
   When Simon turned to Morgenes, the doctor was staring after them, his
old eyes shining and brimful.




   So it was that King John Presbyter died at last on Saint Tunath’s Day, at
an exceedingly advanced age: beloved, revered, and as thoroughly a part of
his people’s lives as the land itself. Although it had been long expected, still
the sorrow of his passing reached out and touched all the countries of Men.
   Some of the very oldest remembered that it had been Tunath’s Day in the
Founding-year 1083—exactly eighty years before—when Prester John had
slain the devil-worm Shurakai and ridden back in triumph through the gates
of Erchester. When this tale was retold, not without some embellishing,
heads nodded wisely. Anointed by God as King—they said—as revealed by
that great deed, then taken back to the bosom of the Redeemer on its
anniversary. It should have been foreseen, they said.
   It was a sad midwinter and Aedontide, although people flocked to
Erchester and the High Castle from all the lands of Osten Ard. Indeed,
many of the local folk began to growl about the visitors who came to take
up the best benches in church, and the same in the taverns. There was more
than a little resentment of outlanders making such a fuss over their king:
although he had been master of all, John had been more like a simple
fiefholder to the townsmen of Erchester. In younger, haler days he had
loved to go out among the people, cutting a beautiful figure all gleaming-
armored and a-horseback. The citizens of the town, in the poorer quarters at
least, often spoke with familiar, possessive pride of “our old man up to th’
Hayholt.”
   Now he was gone, or at least out of the reach of such simple souls. He
belonged to the history-scribes, the poets, and priests.
                                    •••

   In the forty days mandated between the death and burial of a king, John’s
body went to the Hall of Preparing in Erchester, where the priests bathed it
in rare oils, rubbed it with pungent herbal resins from the southern islands,
then bound it up from ankle to neck in white linen, saying all the while
prayers of overmastering piety. King John was next clothed in a simple
gown of the type used by young knights at their first vows, and gently laid
on a bier in the throne room, slender black candles burning all around.
   As Prester John’s body lay in state, Father Helfcene, the king’s
chancellor, ordered the Hayefur kindled atop the rock-fortress at
Wentmouth, something done only in times of war and great happenings.
Few living could remember the last time the mighty torch-tower had been
fired.
   Helfcene also commanded a great pit to be dug at Swertclif, on the
headlands east of Erchester overlooking the Kynslagh—the windy hilltop,
where stood the six snow-thatched barrows of the kings who had held the
Hayholt before John. It was miserable weather for digging, the ground
winter-frozen, but the Swertclif laborers were proud, and suffered the biting
air and bruises and broken skin for the honor of the task. Much of the chill
month of Jonever passed before the excavation was completed and the pit
was covered with a vast tent of red and white sailcloth.
   Preparations at the Hayholt proceeded at a less deliberate pace. The
castle’s four kitchens glowed and smoked like busy foundries as a horde of
perspiring scullions prepared the funeral baked goods, the meats and bread
and festival wafers. The seneschal Peter Gilded-Bowl, a small, fierce man
with yellow hair, was everywhere at once like an avenging angel. With
equal facility he tasted the broth billowing in giant vats, looked for dust in
the cracks of the Great Table—thin chance, since that was Rachel’s
province—and threw imprecations after scurrying servitors. It was, all
agreed, his finest hour.

                                    •••

  The mourning-party gathered at the Hayholt from all the nations of Osten
Ard. Skali Sharp-nose of Kaldskryke, Duke Isgrimnur’s unloved cousin,
arrived from Rimmersgard with ten suspicious, deep-bearded kinsmen.
From the three clans that among them ruled the wild, grassy Thrithings
came the Marchthanes of their reigning houses. Oddly enough, the
clansmen put enmity aside for once and arrived together—a token of their
respect for King John. It was even said that when news of John’s death
reached the Thrithings the Randwarders of the three clans had met at the
borders they guarded so jealously against each other; weeping together, they
had drunk to John’s spirit all through the night.
   From the Sancellan Mahistrevis, the ducal palace in Nabban, Duke
Leobardis sent his son Benigaris with a column of legionaries and mail-clad
knights numbering almost a hundred head. As they disembarked from the
warships, each of the three with Nabban’s golden kingfisher on its sail, the
crowd at wharfside oohed appreciatively. A few respectful cheers were even
raised for Benigaris as he passed, mounted on a tall gray palfrey, but many
people whispered that if this was the nephew of Camaris, greatest knight of
the age of John, then he was a cutting from his father’s tree and not his
uncle’s. Camaris had been a mighty, towering man—or so said those old
enough to have remembered him—and Benigaris, truth to tell, looked to run
a little to fat. But it had been almost forty years since Camaris-sá-Vinitta
had been lost at sea: many of the younger folk suspected that his stature had
grown somewhat in the memories of gaffers and gossips.
   Another great delegation also came from Nabban, one only slightly less
martial than Benigaris’: the Lector Ranessin himself sailed into the
Kynslagh on a beautiful white ship, upon whose azure sail gleamed the
white Tree and golden Pillar of Mother Church. The wharfside crowd,
which had greeted Benigaris and the Nabbanai soldiers mildly—as if in dim
remembrance of days when Nabban had striven with Erkynland for mastery
—hailed the lector with a loud, welcoming cry. Those gathered on the quay
surged forward, and it took the combined force of the king’s and lector’s
guardsmen to hold them back; still, some two or three were crowded so that
they fell into the bone-cold lake, and only swift rescue saved them from
freezing.
   “This is not as I would have wanted it,” the lector whispered to his young
aide, Father Dinivan, “I mean, just look at this gaudy thing they have sent
me.” He gestured at the litter, a splendid creation of carved cherry wood and
blue and white silks. Father Dinivan, robed in homely black, grinned.
   Ranessin, a slender, handsome man of nearly seventy years, frowned
down in annoyance at the waiting litter, then gently beckoned over a
nervous Erkynguard officer.
   “Please take this away,” he said. “We appreciate Chancellor Helfcene’s
thought, but we prefer to walk near the people.”
   The offending conveyance was hustled away, and the lector moved
toward the crowded Kynslagh stairs. As he made the sign of the Tree—
thumb and small finger as hooked branches, then a vertical stroke with the
middle fingers—the jostling crowd slowly opened an aisle up the length of
the great steps.
   “Please don’t walk so fast, Master,” said Dinivan, pushing past reaching,
waving arms. “You’ll outpace your guardsmen.”
   “And what makes you think,”—Ranessin allowed a mischievous smile to
cross his face, so quickly none but Dinivan saw—“that this is not what I am
trying to achieve?”
   Dinivan cursed quietly, then immediately regretted his weakness. The
lector had gained a step on him, and the crowd was pushing in. Luckily, the
dockside wind now sprang to life and Ranessin was forced to slow down,
clutching with his unoccupied hand at his hat, which seemed nearly as tall,
thin, and pale as His Sacredness himself. Father Dinivan, seeing the lector
begin to tack slightly into the wind, struggled forward. When he caught up
with the older man, he took a firm grip on an elbow.
   “Forgive me, Master, but Escritor Velligis would never understand it if I
were to let you fall into the lake.”
   “Of course, my son,” Ranessin nodded, continuing to trace the Tree in
the air on either side of their progress up the long, wide staircase. “I was
thoughtless. You know how much I despise this unnecessary pomp.”
   “But Lector,” Dinivan argued gently, lifting his bushy eyebrows in a look
of mock-surprise, “you are Usires Aedon’s worldly voice. It won’t do to
have you scrambling up stairs like a seminary boy.”
   Dinivan was disappointed when this raised only a faint smile. For a while
they climbed in silent lockstep, the young man retaining his protective
grasp on the older’s arm.
   Poor Dinivan, Ranessin thought. He tries so hard, and is so careful. Not
that he doesn’t treat me—the Lector of Mother Church, after all—with a
certain lack of respect. Of course he does, because I have allowed it—for
my own good. But I am not in a light mood today, and he knows it.
   It was John’s death, of course—but not merely the loss of a good friend
and fine king: it was change, and the Church, in the person of Lector
Ranessin, could not afford to trust change too easily. Of course it was also
the parting—in this world only, the lector reminded himself firmly—from a
man of good heart and intention, although John certainly had been at times
over-direct in the fulfilling of those intentions. Ranessin owed much to
John, not least that the king’s influence had played a large part in the
elevation of the former Oswine of Stanshire to the heights of the church,
and eventually to the Lectorship that no other Erkynlander had held in five
centuries. The king would be much missed.
   Fortunately, Ranessin held hope for Elias. The prince was undoubtedly
courageous, decisive, bold—all traits rare in the sons of great men. The
king-to-be was also short-tempered and somewhat careless, but—Duos
wulstei—these were faults often cured, or at least softened by responsibility
and good counsel.
   As he reached the top of the Kynslagh stairs and entered with his
struggling retinue onto the Royal Walk that circumscribed the walls of
Erchester, the lector promised himself that he would send a trustworthy
advisor to help the new king—and of course to keep a wary eye out for the
Church’s welfare—someone like Velligis, or even young Dinivan . . . no, he
wouldn’t part with Dinivan. Anyway, Ranessin would find somebody to
counteract Elias’ bloody-minded young nobles, and that blowing idiot,
Bishop Domitis.




  The first of Feyever, the day before Candlemansa, dawned bright, chill,
and clear. The sun had barely scaled the steepled peaks of the far mountains
when a slow, solemn crowd began to file into the Hayholt’s chapel. The
king’s body was already lying before the altar on a bier draped in cloth-of-
gold and black silk ribbons.
    Simon watched the nobles in their rich, somber dress with resentful
fascination. He had come to the unused choir loft straight from the kitchens,
still wearing his gravy-stained shirt; even crouched hidden in the shadows
he felt ashamed to be so poorly clad.
    And me the only servant here, he thought. The only one of all who lived
in the castle with our king. Where are all these fancy lords and ladies from?
I recognize only a few—Duke Isgrimnur, the two princes, some others.
    There was certainly something wrong, that those seated in the chapel
below should be so splendid in their funeral silks while he carried the stink
of the scullery on him like a blanket—but wrong in what way? Should the
castle serving help be welcomed in among the nobles? Or was he himself at
fault for daring to intrude?
    What if King John is watching? He felt a chill as he thought it. What if he
is somewhere, watching? Will he tell God that I snuck in wearing a dirty
shirt?
    Lector Ranessin entered at last, arrayed in the full circumstance of his
holy office robes of black, silver, and gold. On his head he wore a wreath of
sacred ciyan leaves, and he held a censer and wand crafted from black
onyx. Motioning the crowd to their knees, he began the opening prayers of
the Mansa-sea-Cuelossan: the Death Mass. As he called out the lines in his
rich, but still ever-so-slightly accented Nabbanai, and censed the body of
the dead king, it seemed to Simon that a light shone on Prester John’s face,
that he could see for a moment how the king must have looked when he had
first ridden, bright-eyed and battle-stained, out of the gates of the new-
conquered Hayholt. How he wished he could have seen him then!
    When the numerous prayers were finished, the company of nobles rose to
sing the Cansim Falis; Simon contented himself with mouthing the words.
As the mourners sat down again, Ranessin began to speak, surprising
everyone by abandoning Nabbanai to use the country-plain Westerling
speech that John had made the common tongue of his kingdom.
    “It may be remembered,” Ranessin intoned, “that when the last nail had
been driven into the Execution Tree, and our Lord Usires was left to hang in
terribly agony, a noble woman of Nabban named Pelippa, daughter of a
mighty knight, saw him and her heart was filled with pity for His suffering.
As the darkness fell that First Night, while Usires Aedon hung dying and
lone—for His disciples had been scourged from the Temple courtyard—she
came to Him with water, which she gave to Him by dipping her rich scarf in
a golden bowl and then bringing it to His dry lips.
   “As she gave Him to drink, Pelippa wept to see the Ransomer’s pain. She
said to Him: ‘Poor man, what have they done to you?’ Usires answered her:
‘Nothing that poor Man is not born to.’
   “Now Pelippa wept afresh, saying: ‘But terrible enough that they kill you
for words, without also they hang you heels-high for the sake of
humiliation.’ And Usires the Reclaimer said: ‘Daughter, it matters not
which way I hang, top-first or the opposite—I am still looking full into the
face of God my Father.’
   “So, then . . .” the lector lowered his gaze to the assemblage, “. . . as was
said by our Lord Usires, so may we say it is with our beloved John. The
common people in the city below us say that John Presbyter is not gone, but
remains to watch over his people and his Osten Ard. The Book of the
Aedon promises that even now he has ascended to our beautiful Heaven of
light and music and blue mountains. Others—our brethren, John’s subjects
in Hernystir—will say that he has gone to join the other heroes in the stars.
It matters not.
   “Whatever he is, he who was once young John the King, be he enthroned
in bright mountains or stellar fields, we know this: he is happily gazing full
into the face of God. . . .”

                                     •••

   When the lector had finished speaking, tears standing in even his eyes,
and the final prayers had been recited, the assembled company left the
chapel.
   Simon watched in reverent silence as King John’s black-clad body
servants began their final services in his behalf, stalking like beetles around
a fallen dragonfly, dressing him in his royal raiment and war-gear. He knew
he should leave—this was beyond sneaking and spying; it bordered on
blasphemy—but he could not make himself move. Fear and sorrow had
been replaced by a strange sense of unreality. Everything seemed a pageant
or mummers’ play, the characters moving stiffly through their parts as
though their limbs were freezing and thawing and then freezing once more.
   The dead king’s servants dressed him in his ice-white armor, tucking his
folded gauntlets into his baldric but leaving his feet bare. They drew a tunic
of sky blue over John’s corselet, and pulled a shiny crimson cloak about his
shoulders, moving all the while as slowly as fever victims. His beard and
hair were knotted up in war-braids, and the iron circlet that signified
mastery of the Hayholt was set upon his brow. At last Noah, the king’s aged
squire, brought out the iron ring of Fingil which he had been keeping back;
the sudden sounds of his grief shattered the enveloping silence. Noah
sobbed so bitterly that Simon wondered how he could see through his tears
to slip the ring onto the king’s white finger.
   Finally the black-cloth beetles lifted King John back onto his bier.
Draped in the cloth-of-gold mantle, he was carried out of his castle for the
last time, three men on each side. Noah followed behind carrying the king’s
dragon-crested war helmet.
   In the shadows of the loft overhead, Simon released what seemed an
hour’s worth of prisoned breath. The king was gone.




   As Duke Isgrimnur saw Prester John’s body pass out through the
Nearulagh Gate, and the procession of nobility began to fall into place
behind, a slow, fog-shrouded feeling overtook him, like a dream of
drowning.
   Don’t be such an ass, old man, he told himself. No one lives forever—
even if John did take a mighty swipe at it.
   The funny thing was, even when they had stood side to side in the
screeching hell of battle, the black-fletched Thrithings arrows whistling past
like Udun’s own—damn, God’s own—lightning, Isgrimnur had always
known that John Presbyter would die abed. To see the man at war was to
see a man anointed by Heaven, untouchable and commanding, a man who
laughed as the blood-mist darkened the sky. If John had been a
Rimmersman, Isgrimnur smiled inwardly, he would have been a bear-shirt
for certain.
   But he is dead, and that’s the hard thing to understand. Look at them,
knights and lords . . . they thought he’d last forever, too. Frightened, the
greater part of them.
   Elias and the lector had taken their places directly behind the king’s bier.
Isgrimnur, Prince Josua, and fair-haired Princess Miriamele—Elias’ only
child—followed closely. The other high families had taken their places as
well, with none of their usual elbowing for favorable position. As the body
was carried down the Royal Walk toward the headlands, the common
people fell into step at the rear, a huge crowd quieted and overawed by the
procession.
   Resting on a bed of long poles at the base of the Royal Walk lay the
king’s boat Sea-Arrow, in which it was said he had long ago come to
Erkynland out of the Westerling islands. It was but a small vessel, no more
than five ells in length; Duke Isgrimnur was glad to see that its woods had
been new-lacquered until they glimmered in the dim Feyever sunlight.
   Gods, but he loved that boat! Isgrimnur remembered. Kingship had left
him scant time for the sea, but the duke recalled one wild night, thirty years
or more ago, when John had been in such a mood that nothing would do but
that he and Isgrimnur—a young man then—must get Sea-Arrow rigged and
go out upon the windlashed Kynslagh. The air had been so cold it stung.
John, almost seventy years old, had whooped and laughed as Sea-Arrow
bucked on the high swells. Isgrimnur, whose ancestors had taken to land
long before his time, had held on tightly to the gunwale and prayed to his
many old gods and his one new one.
   Now the king’s servants and soldiers were laying John’s body into the
boat with great tenderness, lowering it onto a platform that had been
prepared to hold the bier. Forty soldiers of the king’s Erkynguard picked up
the long poles and placed them on their shoulders, bearing the boat up and
carrying it forward.
   The king and Sea-Arrow led the vast company half a league along the
headlands above the bay; at last they reached Swertclif, and the grave. The
covering tent had been removed, and the hole was like an open wound
beside the six solemn, rounded barrows of the Hayholt’s earlier masters.
   On one side of the pit stood a massive pile of cut turves and a heap of
stones and undressed timbers. Sea-Arrow was laid down on the grave’s far
side, where the earth had been dug down at a shallow angle. When the boat
came to rest, the noble houses of Erkynland and the Hayholt’s servants filed
by to place some small thing in boat or barrow as a token of love. Each of
the lands beneath his High Ward had also sent some thing of mighty craft,
that Prester John might carry it with him to Heaven—a robe of precious
Risa-island silk from Perdruin, a white porphyry Tree from Nabban.
Isgrimnur’s party had brought from Elvritshalla in Rimmersgard a silver
axe of Dverning-make with mountain-blue gems in its haft. Lluth, the
Hernystiri king, had sent from the Taig at Hernysadharc a tall ashwood
spear all inlaid with red gold, and with a golden point.

                                     •••

   The noon sun seemed to hang too high in the sky, Duke Isgrimnur
thought as he made his way forward at last: though it rolled unhindered
across the gray-blue dome of the sky, it seemed to hold back its warmth.
The wind blew harder, skirling across the clifftop. Isgrimnur carried John’s
battered black war-boots in his hand. He could not find it in his heart to
look up at the white faces that peered from the crowd like glimmers of
snow in the deep forest.
   As he approached Sea-Arrow he looked one last time at his King.
Although paler than a dove’s breast, still John looked so stern and fine and
full of sleeping life that Isgrimnur caught himself worrying for his old
friend, lying out in the wind this way with no blanket. For a moment he
almost smiled.
   John always said I had the heart of a bear and the wit of an ox,
Isgrimnur chided himself. And if it be cold up here, think how chill it will be
for him in the frozen earth. . . .
   Isgrimnur moved carefully but nimbly around the steep ramp of earth,
using a hand to steady himself when necessary. Although his back hurt him
fiercely, he knew no one suspected it; he was not too old to find some pride
in that.
   Taking John Presbyter’s blue-veined feet in his hands one at a time, he
slipped the boots on. He silently commended the skilled hands in the House
of Preparing for the ease with which his task was accomplished. Without
looking again at his friend’s face he quickly took the hand and kissed it,
then walked away, feeling stranger still.
   Suddenly it seemed to him that this was not his king’s lifeless husk that
was being condemned to the soil, the soul fluttered free like a newly-
unfurled butterfly. The suppleness of John’s limbs, the so-familiar face in
repose—as Isgrimnur had seen it countless times when the king snatched an
hour or two of sleep in the lull of battle—all these things made him feel as
though he deserted a living friend. He knew John was dead—he had held
the king’s hand as the last breaths fluted out of him—still, he felt a traitor.
   So possessed was he by his thoughts that he nearly stepped into Prince
Josua, who moved nimbly around him on his path to the barrow. Isgrimnur
was shocked to see that Josua carried John’s sword Bright-Nail on a gray
cloth.
   What happens here? Isgrimnur wondered. What is he doing with the
sword?
   As the Duke reached the first row of the crowd and turned to watch, his
unease deepened: Josua had laid Bright-Nail on the king’s chest, and was
clasping John’s hands about the hilt.
   This is madness, the duke thought. That sword is for the king’s heir—I
know John would have wanted Elias to have it! And even if Elias chose to
bury it with his father, why does he not lay it in the grave himself?
Madness! Does no one else marvel at such a thing?
   Isgrimnur looked from side to side, but saw nothing on the faces around
him but sorrow.
   Now Elias walked down, passing his younger brother slowly, like a
participant in a stately dance—as in fact he was. The heir to the throne bent
over the gunwale of the boat. What he sent with his father no one could see,
but it was noted by all that although a tear sparkled on Elias’ cheek when he
turned, Josua’s eyes were dry.
   The company now made one more prayer. Ranessin, robes billowing in
the lake-breeze, sprinkled Sea-Arrow with holy oils. Then the boat was
gently lowered down the sloping pitfall, soldiers laboring in silence with
their heavy staves until it lay at last a fathom deep in the earth. Above,
timbers were raised into a great arch and workmen laid the turves about,
one atop the other. Finally, as stones were being lifted into place to
complete John’s cairn, the mourning party turned and made its slow way
back along the cliffs above the Kynslagh.
   The funeral feast that night in the castle’s great hall was not a solemn
gathering, but rather a brave and merry occasion. John was dead, of course,
but his life had been long—far beyond that of most men—and he had left
behind a kingdom wealthy and at peace, and a strong son to rule.
   The fireplaces were banked high; the leaping flames threw strange,
capering shadows on the walls as sweating servants hurried in and out. The
feasters waved their arms and shouted toasts to the old king gone, and the
new one to be crowned in the morning. The castle hounds, large and small,
barked and scrabbled over discarded scraps and rooted in the straw that
covered the floor. Simon, pressed into service bearing one of the heavy
wine ewers from table to table, shouted at and splashed by roaring
merrymakers, felt as though he served wine in some noisy hell from Father
Dreosan’s sermons; the bones scattered across the tables and crunching
underfoot could be the remains of sinners, tormented and then cast aside by
these laughing demons.
   Not yet crowned, Elias already had the look of a warrior-king. He sat at
the main table surrounded by the young lords in his favor: Guthwulf of
Utanyeat, Fengbald the Earl of Falshire, Breyugar of the Westfold, and
others—each wearing some bit of Elias’ green on the mourning black, each
vying to make the loudest toast, the sharpest jest. The king-to-be presided
over all their striving, rewarding the favorites with his loud laughter. From
time to time he leaned over to say something to Skali of Kaldskryke,
Isgrimnur’s kinsman, who sat at Elias’ table by special invitation. Although
he was a large man, hawk-faced and blond-bearded, Skali seemed a little
overwhelmed at the crown prince’s side—especially when Duke Isgrimnur
had received no similar honor. Something Elias now said, though, struck
home; Simon saw the Rimmersman smile, then break out into a great
guffaw and clang his metal goblet against the prince’s. Elias, grinning
wolfishly, turned and said something to Fengbald; he, too, joined the
merriment.
   By comparison, the table at which Isgrimnur sat with Prince Josua and
several others was much more subdued, seeming to match in mood the
prince’s gray raiment. Although the other nobles were doing their best to
make conversation, Simon could see as he passed by that the two chief
figures were having none of it. Josua stared into space, as though fascinated
by the tapestries that lined the walls. Duke Isgrimnur was just as
unresponsive to the table talk, but his reasons were no mystery. Even Simon
could see the way the old duke glowered at Skali Sharp-nose, and how his
huge, gnarled hands plucked distractedly at the fringe of his bear-skin tunic.
   Elias’ slight to one of John’s most faithful knights was not going
unnoticed at other tables: some of the younger nobles, although courteous
enough not to make a show of it, seemed to find the duke’s discomfiture
amusing. They whispered behind their hands, eyebrows raised to signal the
magnitude of the scandal.
   As Simon swayed in place, amazed by the din and the smoke and his
own confused observations, a voice rang out from a back table, cursing him
and calling for more wine, stirring him into scurrying life once more.

                                    •••

   Later in the evening, when Simon finally found a chance to snatch a
moment’s rest in an alcove beneath one of the giant tapestries, he noticed
that a new guest was seated at the head table, wedged in between Elias and
Guthwulf on a tall stool. The newcomer was robed in most unfunereal
scarlet, with black and gold piping wound about the hem of his voluminous
sleeves. As he leaned forward to whisper in Elias’ ear, Simon watched him
with helpless fascination. The man was completely hairless, without even
eyebrows or lashes, but his features were those of a youngish man. His skin,
tight-stretched on his skull, was notably pale even in the flaring orange
rushlight; his eyes were deep-sunken, and so dark that they seemed only
shiny black spots below his naked brows. Simon knew those eyes—they
had glared out at him from the hooded cloak of the cart-driver who had
nearly run him down at Nearulagh Gate. He shuddered and stared. There
was something sickening but enthralling about the man, like a swaying
serpent.
   “He’s a nasty looking one, isn’t he?” said a voice at his elbow. Simon
jumped. A young man, dark-haired and smiling, stood in the alcove behind
him, an ashwood lute cradled against his pigeon-gray tunic.
   “I . . . I’m sorry,” Simon stuttered. “You took me by surprise.”
   “I didn’t mean to,” the other laughed, “I was just coming to see if you
could give me a bit of help.” He pulled his other hand from behind his back
and showed Simon an empty wine cup.
   “Oh . . .” said Simon, “I’m so sorry—I was resting, master . . . I’m very
sorry. . . .”
   “Peace, friend, peace! I did not come to cause trouble for you, but if you
do not stop apologizing, then I will be upset. What’s your name?”
   “Simon, sir.” He hastily upended the ewer and filled the young man’s
flagon. The stranger set his cup down in a niche, readjusted his grip on the
lute, and reached into his tunic to produce another cup. He proffered it with
a bow.
   “Here,” he said, “I was going to steal this, Master Simon, but instead I
think we shall drink each other’s health, and the old king’s memory—and
please don’t call me ‘sir,’ for that I am not.” He bumped the cup against the
ewer until Simon poured again. “There!” said the stranger. “Now, call me
Sangfugol—or, as old Isgrimnur mangles it, ‘Zong-vogol.’”
   The stranger’s excellent imitation of the Rimmersgard accent brought a
tiny smile to Simon’s face. After looking around furtively for Rachel he sat
the ewer down and tipped back the flagon that Sangfugol had given him.
Strong and sour, still the red wine rolled down his parched throat like spring
rain; when he lowered the cup, his smile had widened.
   “Are you part of Duke Isgrimnur’s . . . retinue?” Simon asked, wiping his
lips with his sleeve.
   Sangfugol laughed. Mirth seemed to come quickly to him.
   “Retinue! Quite a word for a bottle boy! No, I am Josua’s harper. I live at
his keep at Naglimund, in the North.”
   “Does Josua like music?!” For some reason this thought astounded
Simon. He poured himself another cupful. “He seems so serious.”
   “And serious he is . . . but that doesn’t mean he dislikes harping or lute
playing. True, it is my melancholy songs that are most often to his liking,
but there are times when he calls for the Ballad of Three-Legged Tom or
some such.”
   Before Simon could ask another question, there was a great whoop of
hilarity from the high table. Simon turned to see that Fengbald had knocked
a flagon of wine into the lap of another man, who was drunkenly wringing
out his shirt while Elias and Guthwulf and the other nobles jibed and
shouted. Only the bald stranger in the scarlet robe was aloof, with cold eyes
and a tight, tooth-baring smile.
   “Who is that?” Simon turned back to Sangfugol, who had finished his
wine and was holding his lute up to his ear, plucking at the strings as he
delicately turned the pegs. “I mean the man in red.”
   “Yes,” said the harper, “I saw you looking at him when I came up.
Frightful fellow, eh? That is Pryrates—a Nabbanai priest, one of Elias’
counselors. People say that he is a marvelous alchemist—although he does
look rather young for it, doesn’t he? Not to mention that it doesn’t quite
seem a fitting practice for a priest. Actually, if you listen closely, you may
also hear it whispered that he is a warlock: a black magician. If you listen
closer still . . .” Here, as if to demonstrate, Sangfugol’s voice dropped
dramatically; Simon had to lean forward to hear. He realized, as he swayed
slightly, that he had just drunk a third flagon of wine.
   “If you listen very, very carefully . . .” the harper continued, “you will
hear people say that Pryrates’ mother was a witch, and his father . . . a
demon!” Sangfugol loudly twanged a lute-string, and Simon leaped back,
surprised. “But Simon, you cannot believe everything you hear—especially
from drunken minstrels,” Sangfugol finished with a chuckle and extended
his hand. Simon stared at it stupidly.
   “To clasp, my friend,” the harper grinned. “I have enjoyed speaking with
you, but I fear I must return to table, where other diversions impatiently
await me. Farewell!”
   “Farewell . . .” Simon grasped Sangfugol’s hand, then watched as the
harper wound his way across the room with the nimbleness of an
experienced drunkard.
   As Sangfugol took his seat again, Simon’s eyes came to rest on two of
the serving girls leaning against a wall in the hallway at the room’s far side,
fanning themselves with their aprons and talking. One of them was
Hepzibah, the new girl; the other was Rebah, one of the kitchen maids.
   There was a certain warmth in Simon’s blood. It would be so easy to
walk across the room and speak to them. There was something about that
Hepzibah, a sauciness in her eyes and mouth when she laughed. . . . Feeling
more than a little lightheaded, Simon stepped out into the room, the roar of
voices rising around him like a flood.
   A moment, a moment, he thought feeling suddenly flushed and
frightened, how can I just walk up and speak—won’t they know I’ve been
watching them? Wouldn’t they . . .
   “Hi there, you lazy clodpoll! Bring us some more of that wine!”
   Simon turned to see red-faced Earl Fengbald waving a goblet at him
from the king’s table. In the hallway the serving girls were sauntering away.
Simon ran back to the alcove to get his ewer, and fetched it out from a
tangle of dogs fighting over a chop. One pup, young and scrawny, with a
splotch of white on its brown face, whined piteously at the fringe of the
mob, unable to compete with the larger dogs. Simon found a scrap of greasy
skin on a deserted chair and tossed it to the little dog. It wagged its stub of
tail as it bolted the treat, then followed at Simon’s heels as he carried the
ewer across the room.
   Fengbald and Guthwulf, the long-jawed Earl of Utanyeat, were involved
in some kind of wrist-wrestling contest, their daggers drawn and plunged
into the tabletop on either side of the combatants’ arms. Simon stepped
around the table as nimbly as he could, pouring wine from the heavy ewer
into the cups of the shouting spectators and trying not to trip over the dog,
which was darting in and out between his feet. The king was watching the
contest with amusement, but he had his own page at his shoulder so Simon
left his goblet alone. He poured Pryrates’ wine last, avoiding the priest’s
glance, but could not help noticing the strange scent of the man, an
inexplicable amalgam of metal and over-sweet spices. Backing away, he
saw the little dog rooting in the straw near Pryrates’ shiny black boots, on
the track of some fallen treasure.
   “Come!” Simon hissed, backing farther away and slapping his knee, but
the dog paid no heed. It began to dig with both paws, its back bumping
against the priest’s red-robed calf. “Come along!” Simon whispered again.
   Pryrates turned his head to look down, shiny skull pivoting slowly on his
long neck. He lifted his foot and brought his heavy boot down on the dog’s
back—a swift, compact movement finished in a heartbeat. There was a
crack of splintered bone, and a muffled squeal; the little dog writhed
helplessly in the straw until Pryrates lifted his heel again and crushed its
skull.
   The priest stared for a disinterested moment at the body, then lifted his
gaze, his eyes alighting on Simon’s horrified face. That black stare—
remorseless, unconcerned—caught and held him. Pryrates’ flat, dead eyes
flicked down again to the dog, and when they returned to Simon a slow grin
stretched across the priest’s face.
   What can you do about it, boy? the smile said. And who cares?
   The priest’s attention was drawn back to the table; Simon, freed, dropped
the ewer and stumbled away, looking for a place to throw up.

                                    •••

   It was just before midnight; fully half the revelers had staggered, or been
carried, off to bed. It was doubtful many of them would be present for the
morrow’s coronation. Simon was pouring into a drunken guest’s cup the
heavily watered wine that was all Peter Gilded-Bowl would serve at this
late hour, when Earl Fengbald, the only one remaining of the king’s party,
staggered into the hall from the commons outside. The young noble was
disheveled and his breeches were half-undone, but he wore a beatific smile
on his face.
   “Come outside, everybody!” he shouted, “Come outside now! Come
see!” He lurched back out the door. Those who could do it pulled
themselves to their feet and followed him, elbowing and jesting, some
singing drunkenly.
   Fengbald stood in the commons, head tilted backward, black hair
hanging unbound down the back of his stained tunic as he stared up into the
sky. He was pointing; one by one, the faces of the followers turned up to
look.
   Across the sky a strange shape was painted, like a deep wound that
spurted blood against the nightblack: a great, red comet, streaming across
the sky from north to south.
   “A bearded star!” someone shouted. “An omen!”
   “The old king is dead, dead, dead!” cried Fengbald, waving his dagger in
the air as if daring the stars to come down and fight. “Long live the new
king!” he shouted, “A new age is begun!”
   Cheers rang out, and some of those present stamped their feet and
howled. Others began a giddy, laughing dance, men and women holding
hands as they whirled in a circle. Above them the red star gleamed like a
smoldering coal.
   Simon, who had followed the merrymakers outside to see the cause of
the ruckus, turned back to the hall; the shouts of the dancers floated up
behind him. He was surprised to see Doctor Morgenes standing in the
shadows of the bailey wall. The old man, wrapped in a heavy robe against
the chill air, did not notice his apprentice—he, too, was staring up at the
bearded star, the scarlet slash across the vault of Heaven. But unlike the
others, there was no drunkenness or glee upon his face. He looked fearful
and cold and small.
   He looked, Simon thought, like a man alone in the wilderness listening to
the hungry song of wolves. . . .