
                      The Conqueror Star




The spring and summer of Elias’ first regnal year were magical, sun-
bright with pomp and display. All Osten Ard seemed reborn. The young
nobility came back to fill the Hayholt’s long-quiet halls, and so marked was
the difference that they might have brought color and daylight with them to
what had been a dark place. As in John’s young days the castle was full of
laughter and drinking, and the swagger of shining battle-blades and armor.
At night music was heard in the hedged gardens once more, and the
splendid ladies of the court flitted to—or fled from—assignations in the
warm darkness like graceful, flowing ghosts. The tourney field sprang back
to life, sprouting multicolored tents like a bank of flowers. To the common
people it seemed as though every day was holiday, and that the
merrymaking would have no end. King Elias and his friends made furious
sport, in the manner of children who must soon be put to bed, and know it.
All of Erkynland seemed to roister and tumble like a summer-drunken dog.
   Some of the villagers muttered darkly—it was hard to get the spring crop
sowed with such heedlessness in the air. Many of the older, sourer priests
grumbled at the spread of licentiousness and gluttony. But most people
laughed at these doomsayers. Elias’ monarchy was but newly-coined, and
Erkynland—all of Osten Ard, it seemed—had come out of a long winter of
age into a season of headlong youth. How could that be unnatural?
    Simon felt his fingers cramping as he laboriously traced the letters onto
the gray parchment. Morgenes was at the window, holding a long, fluted
piece of glass pipe up to the sunlight as he examined it for dirt.
    If he says one word about the thing not being properly cleaned, I’ll walk
out, Simon thought. The only sunshine I see anymore is what’s reflected in
the beakers I polish.
    Morgenes turned from the window and brought the piece of glass pipe
over to the table where Simon slaved at his writing. As the old man
approached, Simon prepared himself for the scolding, feeling a swelling of
resentment that seemed to lodge between his shoulder blades.
    “A lovely job, Simon!” Morgenes said as he laid the pipette down beside
the parchment. “You take much better care of things around here than I ever
could by myself.” The doctor gave him a pat on the arm and leaned over.
“How are you coming there?”
    “Terribly,” Simon heard himself say. Even though the resentful knot was
still there, he was disgusted by the petty tone of his own voice. “I mean, I’ll
never be good at this. I can’t make the letters cleanly without the ink
blobbing up, and I can’t read any of what I’m writing anyway!” He felt a
little better for having said it, but he still felt stupid.
    “You’re worrying about nothing, Simon,” the doctor said, and
straightened up. He seemed distracted: as he spoke his eyes darted about the
room. “First of all, everybody’s writing ‘blobs up’ at first; some folk spend
their whole lives blobbing up—that doesn’t mean they have nothing
important to say. Secondly, of course you can’t read the things you’re
writing—the book is written in Nabbanai. You can’t read Nabbanai.”
    “But why should I copy words that I don’t understand?” Simon growled.
“That’s foolish.”
    Morgenes turned sharp eyes back to Simon. “Since I told you to do it, I
suppose I’m foolish, too?”
    “No, I didn’t mean that . . . it’s just that . . .”
    “Don’t bother to explain.” The doctor pulled up a stool and sat by
Simon’s side. His long, bent fingers scrabbled aimlessly in the rubbish of
the tabletop. “I want you to copy these words because it’s easier to
concentrate on the form and shape of your letters if you’re not distracted by
the subject matter.”
   “Hmmmph.” Simon felt only partially satisfied. “Can’t you tell me what
book it is, anyway? I keep looking at the pictures, but I still can’t figure it
out.” He flipped the page back to an illustration that he had stared at many
times in the past three days, a grotesque woodcut of an antlered man with
huge staring eyes and black hands. Cringing figures huddled at his feet;
above the horned man’s head a flaming sun hung against an ink-black sky.
   “Like this,” Simon pointed at the strange picture, “here at the bottom it
says ‘Sa Asdridan Condiquilles’—what does that mean?”
   “It means,” Morgenes said as he closed the cover and picked the book
up, “‘The Conqueror’s Star,’ and it is not the kind of thing that you need to
know about.” He placed the book on a precariously balanced stack against
the wall.
   “But I’m your apprentice!” Simon protested. “When are you going to
teach me something?”
   “Idiot boy! What do you think I’m doing? I’m trying to teach you to read
and to write. That’s the most important thing. What do you want to learn?”
   “Magic!” Simon said immediately. Morgenes stared at him.
   “And what about reading . . . ?” The doctor asked ominously.
   Simon was cross. As usual, people seemed determined to balk him at
every turn. “I don’t know,” he said. “What’s so important about reading and
letters, anyway? Books are just stories about things. Why should I want to
read books?”
   Morgenes grinned, an old stoat finding a hole in the henyard fence.
   “Ah, boy, how can I be mad at you . . . what a wonderful, charming,
perfectly stupid thing to say!” The doctor chuckled appreciatively, deep in
his throat.
   “What do you mean?” Simon’s eyebrows moved together as he frowned.
“Why is it wonderful and stupid?”
   “Wonderful because I have such a wonderful answer,” Morgenes
laughed.
   “Stupid because . . . because young people are made stupid, I suppose—
as tortoises are made with shells, and wasps with stings—it is their
protection against life’s unkindnesses.”
   “Begging your pardon?” Simon was totally flummoxed, now.
   “Books,” Morgenes said grandly, leaning back on his precarious stool,
“—books are magic. That is the simple answer. And books are traps as
well.”
   “Magic? Traps?”
   “Books are a form of magic—” the doctor lifted the volume he had just
laid on the stack, “—because they span time and distance more surely than
any spell or charm. What did so-and-so think about such-and-such two
hundred years agone? Can you fly back through the ages and ask him? No
—or at least, probably not.
   “But, ah! If he wrote down his thoughts, if somewhere there exists a
scroll, or a book of his logical discourses . . . he speaks to you! Across
centuries! And if you wish to visit far Nascadu, or lost Khandia, you have
also but to open a book. . . .”
   “Yes, yes, I suppose I understand all that.” Simon did not try to hide his
disappointment. This was not what he had meant by the word ‘magic.’
“What about traps, then? Why ‘traps’?”
   Morgenes leaned forward, waggling the leather-bound volume under
Simon’s nose. “A piece of writing is a trap,” he said cheerily, “and the best
kind. A book, you see, is the only kind of trap that keeps its captive—which
is knowledge—alive forever. The more books you have,” the doctor waved
an all-encompassing hand about the room, “the more traps, then the better
chance of capturing some particular, elusive, shining beast—one that might
otherwise die unseen.” Morgenes finished with a grand flourish, dropping
the book back on the pile with a loud thump. A tiny cloud of dust leaped up,
the flecks milling in the banded sunlight leaking past the window bars.
   Simon stared at the shimmering dust for a moment, collecting his
thoughts. Following the doctor’s words was like trying to catch mice while
wearing mittens.
   “But what about real magic?” he said at last, a stubborn crease between
his brows. “Magic like they say Pryrates does up in the tower?”
   For a brief instant a look of anger—or was it fear?—contorted the
doctor’s face.
   “No, Simon,” he said quietly. “Do not throw Pryrates up to me. He is a
dangerous, foolish man.”
   Despite his own horrid memories of the red priest, Simon found the
intensity of the doctor’s look strange and a little frightening. He nerved
himself to ask another question. “You do magic, don’t you? Why is Pryrates
dangerous?”
    Morgenes stood suddenly, and for a wild moment Simon feared that the
old man might strike him, or shout. Instead Morgenes walked stiffly to the
window and stared out for a moment. From where Simon sat, the doctor’s
thin hair was a bristly halo above his narrow shoulders.
    Morgenes turned and walked back. His face was grave, troubled by
doubt. “Simon,” he said, “it will probably do me no good at all to say this,
but I want you to keep away from Pryrates—don’t go near him, and don’t
talk about him . . . except to me, of course.”
    “But why?” Contrary to what the doctor might think, Simon had already
decided to stay far away from the alchemist. Morgenes was not usually so
forthcoming, though, and Simon was not going to waste the opportunity.
“What is so bad about him?”
    “Have you noticed that people are afraid of Pryrates? That when he
comes down from his new chambers in Hjeldin’s Tower people hurry to get
out of his way? There is a reason. He is feared because he himself has none
of the right kinds of fear. It shows in his eyes.”
    Simon put the pen nib to his mouth and chewed, thoughtfully, then took
it out again. “Right kinds of fear? What does that mean?”
    “There is no such thing as ‘fearless,’ Simon—not unless a man is mad.
People who are called fearless are usually just good at hiding it, and that is
quite a different thing. Old King John knew fear, and both his sons certainly
have known it . . . I have, too. Pryrates . . . well, people see that he doesn’t
fear or respect the things that the rest of us do. That is often what we mean
when we call someone mad.”
    Simon found this fascinating. He wasn’t sure that he could believe either
Prester John or Elias had ever been afraid, but the subject of Pryrates was
itself compelling.
    “Is he mad, doctor? How could that be? He is a priest, and one of the
king’s counselors.” But Simon remembered the eyes and toothy smile, and
knew Morgenes was right.
    “Let me put it another way.” Morgenes twined a curl of snowy beard
around his finger. “I spoke to you of traps, of searching for knowledge as
though hunting an elusive creature. Well, where I and other knowledge-
seekers go out to our traps to see what bright beast we may have been lucky
enough to capture, Pryrates throws open his door at night and waits to see
what comes in.” Morgenes took the quill pen away from Simon, then lifted
the sleeve of his robe and dabbed away some of the ink that had smeared on
Simon’s cheek. “The problem with Pryrates’ approach,” he continued, “is
that if you do not like the beast that comes to call, it is hard—very, very
hard—to get the door closed again.”




   “Hah!” Isgrimnur growled. “A touch, man, a touch! Admit it!”
   “The barest whisper across my vest,” Josua said, raising an eyebrow in
feigned surprise. “I’m sorry to see that infirmity has driven you to such
desperate devices . . .” In mid-sentence, without altering tone, he lunged
forward. Isgrimnur caught the wooden blade on his own hilt with a clack,
and skewed the thrust aside.
   “Infirmity?” the older man hissed through bared teeth. “I’ll give you an
infirmity that will send you crying back to your wet nurse!”
   Still swift for all his years and bulk, the Duke of Elvritshalla pressed
forward, his two-handed grip enabling him to keep good control as he
swung the wooden sword in wide arcs. Josua leaped backward, parrying,
thin hair hanging in sweat-dampened points across his forehead. At last he
saw an opening. As Isgrimnur brought the practice sword around in another
whistling sweep, the prince ducked down, using his own blade to help angle
the duke’s cut past his head, then hooked a foot behind Isgrimnur’s heel and
pulled. The duke crashed backward onto the ground like an old tree. A
moment later Josua, too, had slumped to the grass at Isgrimnur’s side. With
his single hand he nimbly unlaced his thick, padded vest and rolled onto his
back.
   Isgrimnur, puffing like a bellows, said nothing for several long moments.
His eyes were closed; sweat-beads in his beard gleamed in the strong
sunlight. Josua leaned over to stare. Then, a look of worry crossing his face,
he reached over to undo Isgrimnur’s vest. As he got his fingers under the
knot the duke’s great pink hand came up and buffeted him on the side of the
head, rolling him again onto his back. The prince lifted a hand to his ear and
winced.
   “Hah!” Isgrimnur wheezed. “That’ll learn you . . . Young pup . . .”
    Another stretch of silence followed as the two men lay gasping, staring
up into the cloudless sky.
    “You cheat, little man,” Isgrimnur said at last, levering himself into a
sitting position. “The next time you wander back here to the Hayholt I will
have some revenge. Besides, had it not been so gods-cursed hot, and me so
damnably fat, I would have staved in your ribs an hour ago.”
    Josua sat up, shading his eyes. Two figures were approaching across the
yellow grass of the tourney field. One was draped in a long robe. “It is hot,”
Josua said.
    “And in Novander!” Isgrimnur grunted, pulling off the dueling-vest.
“The Days of the Hound are long behind us, and still this by-the-Mother
heat! Where is the rain?”
    “Frightened away, perhaps.” He squinted at the two figures as they drew
nearer.
    “Ho, my young brother!” one of the two figures called. “And old Nuncle
Isgrimnur! It looks like you have worn yourselves out at your play!”
    “Josua and the heat have damn near killed me, Your Majesty,” Isgrimnur
called out as the king approached. Elias was garbed in a rich tunic of sea
green. Dark-eyed Pryrates walked at his side in flapping red robe, a
comradely scarlet bat.
    Josua stood, extending his hand to Isgrimnur as the older man clambered
to his feet. “Duke Isgrimnur, as usual, exaggerates,” the prince said softly.
“I was forced to knock him to the ground and sit on him to save my own
life.”
    “Yes, yes, we were watching your horseplaying from Hjeldin’s Tower,”
Elias said, waving a careless hand back to where the tower’s bulk loomed
over the Hayholt’s outwall, “—weren’t we, Pryrates?”
    “Yes, Sire.” Pryrates’ smile was thin as thread, his voice a dry rasp.
“Your brother and the duke are mighty men indeed.”
    “By the way, Your Majesty,” Isgrimnur said, “may I ask you about
something? I hate to trouble you with state business at such a time.”
    Elias, who had been staring out across the field, turned to the old duke
with a look of mild annoyance. “I am, as it happens, discussing some
important matters with Pryrates. Why do you not come to see me when I am
holding court on such things?” He turned back again. Across the tourney
field Guthwulf and Count Eolair of Nad Mullach—a kinsman of Hernystir’s
King Lluth—were chasing a fractious stallion that had broken its traces.
Elias laughed at the sight and elbowed Pryrates, who favored him with
another perfunctory smile.
   “Um, your pardon, Majesty,” Isgrimnur resumed, “but I have been trying
to take this matter up with you for a fortnight. Your chancellor Helfcene
keeps telling me that you’re too busy—”
   “—At Hjeldin’s Tower,” Josua added curtly. For a moment the brothers
locked eyes, then Elias turned to the duke.
   “Oh, very well, then. What is it?”
   “It’s the royal garrison at Vestvennby. They have been gone for well over
a month now, and remain unreplaced. The Frostmarch is still a wild place,
and I do not have enough men to keep the northern Wealdhelm Road open
without the Vestvennby garrison. Will you not send another troop?”
   Elias had returned his gaze to Guthwulf and Eolair, two small figures
shimmering in the heat as they chased the diminishing stallion. He
answered without turning. “Skali of Kaldskryke says that you have more
than enough men, old Uncle. He says you are hoarding your soldiers at
Elvritshalla and Naarved. Why is that?” His voice was deceptively light.
   Before the startled Isgrimnur could reply, Josua spoke up. “Skali Sharp-
nose is a liar if he says that. You are a fool if you believe him.”
   Elias whirled, his lip curling. “Is that right, brother Josua? Skali is a liar?
And I should take your word for that, you who have never tried to hide your
hatred of me?”
   “Now then, now then . . .” Isgrimnur interrupted, flustered and more than
a little frightened. “Elias . . . Your Majesty, you know my loyalty—I was
the firmest friend your father ever had!”
   “Oh, yes, my father!” Elias snorted.
   “. . . And please do not take your displeasure over these scandalous
rumors—for that is all they are—out on Josua. He does not hate you! He is
as loyal as I am!”
   “Of that,” said the king, “I have no doubt. I shall garrison Vestvennby
when I am ready to, and not before!” For a moment Elias stared at them
both, eyes wide. Pryrates, long-silent, reached up a white hand to tug at
Elias’ tunic sleeve.
   “Please, my lord,” he said, “this is not the time or place for such
things . . .” he flicked an impudent, heavy-lidded glance at Josua, “. . . or so
I humbly submit.”
    The king stared at his minion, and then nodded once. “You are right. I
have allowed myself to become angered over nothing. Forgive me, Uncle,”
he said to Isgrimnur, “for as you said, it is a hot day. Forgive my temper.”
He smiled.
    Isgrimnur bobbed his head. “Of course, Sire. It is easy to let ill-humors
get the best of us in such stifling weather. It is strange, this late in the year,
is it not?”
    “That it is.” Elias turned and grinned broadly at the red-cloaked priest.
“Pryrates, here, for all his holy standing in the Church, cannot seem to
convince God to give us the rain we are praying for—can you, counselor?”
    Pryrates looked at the king strangely, ducking his head back into the
collar of his robe like an albino tortoise. “Please, my Lord . . .” he said, “let
us resume our talk and leave these gentlemen to their swordplay.”
    “Yes.” The king nodded. “I suppose so.” As the pair began to move off,
Elias stopped. He wheeled slowly around to face Josua, who was picking
the wooden practice swords up from the dry grass.
    “You know, brother,” the king said, “it has been a long time since the two
of us crossed staves. Watching you has put me in mind of those old times.
What do you say we make a few passes, as long as we are all here upon the
field?”
    A quiet moment passed. “As you wish, Elias,” Josua replied at last, and
tossed one of the wooden blades to the king, who caught the hilt deftly in
his right hand.
    “. . . As a matter of fact,” Elias said, a half-smile playing across his lips,
“I don’t believe we have engaged since your . . . accident.” He put on a look
of greater solemnity. “Lucky for you it was not your sword-wielding hand
that was lost.”
    “Lucky, indeed.” Josua measured himself a pace and a half, then turned
to face Elias.
    “On the other hand,” Elias began, “—ah, that was a poor choice of
words, wasn’t it? My apologies. Alternately, it is unlucky that we must
fence with these poor wooden oars.” He waggled the practice sword. “I do
so enjoy watching you use—what do you call that thin blade of yours?—ah,
Naidel. It is a pity you do not have it here.” Without warning Elias leaped
forward, swinging a hard backhand toward Josua’s head. The prince caught
the blow, allowing it to slide by, then thrust forward. Elias trapped the
oncoming lunge and deftly turned it aside. The two brothers backed apart,
circling.
    “Yes.” Josua leveled his sword before him, his thin face slick with sweat.
“It is too bad that Naidel is not with me. It is also too bad that you do not
have Bright-Nail.” The prince made a swift downward cut, and slid into
another looping thrust. The king backpedaled swiftly, then counter-attacked.
    “Bright-Nail?” said Elias, breathing a little heavily. “What do you mean
by that? You know that it is buried with our father.” He ducked an arching
backhand and pushed Josua back.
    “Oh, I know,” said Josua, parrying, “but a king’s sword—just like his
kingdom—should be wisely,”—a thrust—“and proudly,”—a counter-thrust
—“. . . should be wisely and carefully used . . . by his heir.”
    The two wooden blades slid together with a noise like an axe cleaving
timber. The pressure moved down until the hilts locked together, and Elias’
and Josua’s faces were merely inches apart. Muscles bunched beneath the
brothers’ shirts; for a moment they were nearly still, the only movement a
slight trembling as they strained against each other. Finally Josua, who
could not grip his hilt with two hands as the king could, felt his blade begin
to slide. With a supple shrug he disengaged and sprang backward, lowering
the blade before him again.
    As they faced each other across the expanse of grass, chests heaving, a
loud, deep tolling rang out across the tourney field: the bells of Green
Angel Tower marking the noontide.
    “There you are, gentlemen!” cried Isgrimnur, a sickly smile on his face.
There had been no mistaking the naked hatred that flowed between the two.
“There’re the bells, and that means dinnertime. Shall we call it a draw? If I
don’t get out of the sun and find a flagon of wine, I’m afraid I won’t make it
to Aedonmansa this year. These old northern bones weren’t meant to stand
such cruel heat.”
    “The duke is right, my lord,” Pryrates rasped, laying his hand on Elias’
wrist, which still held the upraised sword. A reptilian smile tightened the
priest’s lips. “You and I can finish our business as we walk back.”
    “Very well,” Elias grunted, and tossed the sword over his shoulder where
it struck the ground and cartwheeled once, then fell flat. “Thank you for the
exercise, brother.” He turned and offered his arm to Pryrates. They moved
away, scarlet and green.
   “What do you say, Josua?” Isgrimnur asked, taking the wooden sword
from the prince’s hand. “Shall we go and have some wine?”
   “Yes, I suppose so,” Josua replied, bending to pick up the vests as
Isgrimnur retrieved the sword the king had flung away. He straightened,
staring into the distance. “Do the dead always stand between the living,
Uncle?” he asked quietly, then drew his hand across his face. “Never mind
you. Let us go and find someplace cool.”




   “Really, Judith, it’s all right. Rachel won’t mind . . .”
   Simon’s questing hand was captured mere inches away from the mixing
bowl. Judith’s grip, for all her pinkness and plumpness, was quite strong.
   “Get on with you. ‘Rachel wouldn’t mind,’ indeed! Rachel would break
every bone in this frail old body of mine.” Pushing Simon’s hand back into
his lap, Judith blew a strand of hair out of her eyes and wiped her fingers on
her stained apron. “I should have known that the merest whiff of the
Aedontide bread a-baking would bring you ’round like an Inniscrich camp-
dog.”
   Simon traced sad patterns in the flour-strewn counter.
   “But Judith, you’ve got mounds and mounds of dough—why can’t I have
a taste from the bowl?”
   Judith levered herself up from the stool and moved gracefully to one of
the kitchen’s hundreds of shelves, like a barge on a placid river. Two young
scullions scattered before her like startled seagulls. “Now, where . . .” she
mused, “. . . where is that crock of sweet butter?” As she stood, finger to
mouth in a thoughtful pose, Simon edged nearer to the mixer bowl.
   “Don’t you dare, laddie.” Judith cast the words over her shoulder without
even turning to look at him. Did she have eyes on all sides? “It’s not that
there’s not dough to spare, Simon. Rachel doesn’t want you spoiling your
supper.” She continued her perusal of the orderly shelves stacked with
goods as Simon sat back and glowered.
   Despite the occasional frustrations, the kitchen was a fine place. Longer
even than Morgenes’ chambers, it seemed nevertheless small and intimate,
full of the pulsing warmth of the ovens and the scents of good things. Lamb
stew seethed in iron pots, Aedontide breads were rising in the oven, and
papery brown onions hung like copper bells in the fogged window. The air
was thick with the smells of spices, tangy ginger and cinnamon, saffron,
cloves, and scratchy pepper. Scullions rolled barrels of flour and pickled
fish through the door, or pulled loaves from the baking ovens with flat
wooden paddles. One of the chief apprentices was boiling rice paste over
the fire in a pot of almond milk, making a blanchesweet for the king’s
dessert. And Judith herself, a huge, gentle woman who made the giant
kitchen seem as intimate as a farmer’s cot, directed all without once raising
her voice, a kindly but sharp-eyed sovereign in her kingdom of bricks and
pots and firelight.
   She returned with the missing crock, and as Simon regretfully watched
she took a long-handled brush and dabbed the butter over the braided
Aedontide loaves.
   “Judith,” Simon asked at last, “if it’s almost Aedonmansa, why is there
no snow? Morgenes said he’s never seen it wait this late in the year.”
   “That I don’t know, I’m sure,” Judith said briskly. “We had no rain in
Novander, either. I expect it’s just a dry year.” She frowned, and brushed
again at the nearest loaf.
   “They have been watering the sheep and cows from the town in the
Hayholt’s moat,” Simon said.
   “Have they, then?”
   “Yes. You can see the brown rings around the edges where the water’s
gone down. There are places you can stand where the water doesn’t even
reach your knees!”
   “And you’ve found them all, I don’t doubt.”
   “I think so,” Simon replied proudly. “And last year this time it was all
frozen. Think of it!”
   Judith looked up from her loaf-glazing to fix Simon with her pale, kind
blue eyes. “I know it’s exciting when things like this happen,” she said, “but
just remember, laddie, we need that water. There’ll be no more fine meals if
we get neither rain nor snow. You can’t drink the Kynslagh, you know.” The
Kynslagh, like the Gleniwent that fed it, was as salty as the sea.
    “I know that,” Simon said. “I’m sure it will snow soon—or rain, since
it’s so warm. It’s just that it will be a very strange midwinter.”
    Judith was about to say something else when she stopped, looking over
Simon’s shoulder at the doorway.
    “Yes, girl, what is it?” she asked. Simon turned to see a familiar curly-
haired serving girl standing a few feet away—Hepzibah.
    “Rachel sent me to find Simon, mum,” she replied, giving a lazy half-
curtsy. “She needs him to get something down from a high shelf.”
    “Well, dearie, you don’t need to ask me. He’s just sitting here mooning
over my baking, not being any help or anything.” She made a shooing
gesture at Simon. He did not see it, as he was admiring Hepzibah’s tight-
cinched apron, and the wavy hair which her cap could neither control nor
contain. “‘Lysia’s mercy, boy, get on with you.” Judith leaned over and
poked him with the handle of the brush.
    Hepzibah had already turned and was nearly out the door. As Simon
scrambled down off his stool to follow, the kitchen-mistress laid a warm
hand on his arm.
    “Here,” she said, “I seem to have spoiled this one—see, it’s all crooked.”
She handed him a loaf of warm bread, twisted like a piece of rope and
smelling of sugar.
    “Thank you!” he said, tearing off a piece and pushing it into his mouth as
he hurried to the door. “It’s good!”
    “Of course it is!” Judith called after him. “If you tell Rachel, I’ll skin
you!” By the time she had finished, she was shouting at an empty doorway.

                                    •••

    It only took a few paces before Simon caught up with Hepzibah, who
was not walking very quickly.
    Was she waiting for me? he wondered, feeling oddly breathless, then
decided it was more likely that anyone given an errand which took them out
of Rachel’s clutches would dawdle all they could.
    “Would you . . . would you like some of this?” he asked, gasping slightly.
The serving-girl took a piece of the sweet bread and sniffed it, then popped
it into her mouth.
   “Oh, that’s good, that is,” she said, then gifted Simon with a dazzling
smile, eyes crinkling at the corners. “Give me another, won’t you?” He did.
   They passed out of the hall and into the courtyard. Hepzibah crossed her
arms as if to hug herself. “Ooh, it’s cold,” she said. It was actually fairly
warm—blazing hot, considering it was Decander-month—but now that
Hepzibah had mentioned it, Simon was sure that he could detect a breeze.
   “Yes, it is cold, isn’t it?” he said, and fell silent again.
   As they walked past the corner of the inner keep that housed the royal
residences, Hepzibah pointed up to a small window just below the upper
turret. “See there?” she asked. “Just the other day I saw the princess
standing there, combing her hair . . . oh, my, but hasn’t she got nice hair?”
   A dim memory of gold catching the afternoon sunlight floated up in
Simon’s mind, but he was not to be distracted.
   “Oh, I think you have much nicer hair,” he said, then turned away to look
at one of the guardtowers in the Middle Bailey wall, a treacherous blush
stealing up his cheeks.
   “Do you really?” laughed Hepzibah. “I think it’s the worst tangle.
Princess Miriamele has ladies to brush hers. Sarrah—you know her, the
fair-haired girl?—knows one of them. Sarrah says that this lady told her the
princess is very sad, sometimes, and that she wants to go back to Meremund
where she grew up.”
   Simon was looking with great interest at Hepzibah’s neck, wreathed by
the sprays of curly brown hair that hung down from her cap. “Hmmm,” he
said.
   “You want to know something else?” Hepzibah asked, turning away from
the tower. “—What are you staring at?” she squealed, but her eyes were
merry. “Stop it, I told you my hair was in a strew. Do you want to know
something else about the princess?”
   “What?”
   “Her father wants her to marry Earl Fengbald, but she doesn’t want to.
The king is very angry with her, and Fengbald is threatening to leave the
court and go back to Falshire—although why he’d want to do that, who
knows. Lofsunu says he never will, since no one in his earldom has enough
money to appreciate his horses and clothes and things.”
   “Who’s Lofsunu?” Simon wanted to know.
    “Oh.” Hepzibah looked coy. “He’s a soldier I know. He’s with Count
Breyugar’s household force. He’s very handsome.”
    The last of the Aedontide bread turned to wet ashes in Simon’s mouth.
“A soldier?” he said quietly. “Is he . . . a relative of yours?”
    Hepzibah giggled, a sound that Simon was beginning to find a little
irritating. “A relative? Merciful Rhiap, no, I should say not! Mooning
around after me all the time!” She giggled again. Simon liked it even less.
“Maybe you’ve seen him,” she continued, “—he’s a guard in the eastern
barracks? Big shoulders and a beard?” She sketched in the air a man in
whose shadow two Simons could comfortably have sat on a summer day.
    Simon’s feelings were at war with his more sensible nature. His feelings
won. “Soldiers are stupid,” he grunted.
    “They are not!” said Hepzibah. “You take that back! Lofsunu is a fine
man! Someday he’s going to marry me!”
    “Well, you’ll make a fine couple,” Simon snarled, then felt sorry. “I hope
you’ll be happy,” he finished, hoping that the reasons for his resentment
were not as crystallinely clear as he felt sure they were.
    “Well, we will be,” said Hepzibah, mollified. She stared at a pair of
yeomen warders walking on the battlements above their heads, long pikes
couched on shoulders. “Someday Lofsunu will be a sergeant, and we shall
have a house of our own in Erchester. We’ll be happy as . . . as can be.
Happier than that poor princess, anyway.”
    Grimacing, Simon picked up a round stone and rattled it off the bailey
wall.

                                    •••

   Doctor Morgenes, pacing the battlements, looked down as Simon and
one of the young serving girls passed beneath him. A dry breeze blew his
hood back from his head as the couple passed below. He smiled and silently
wished Simon good luck—the boy appeared to need it. His awkward
carriage and bouts of sullenness made him seem more child than man, but
he had the height, and showed the promise of growing into it some day.
Simon was straddling the borderline, and even the doctor, whose age no one
in the castle now could guess, remembered what that was like.
   There was a sudden whirring of wings in the air behind him; Morgenes
turned, but slowly, as if it was no surprise. Anyone watching would have
seen a fluttering gray shadow that hung in the air before him for the span of
a few heartbeats, then disappeared into the spacious folds of his gray
sleeves.
   The doctor’s hands, which had been empty a moment earlier, now held a
small roll of fine parchment bound with a slender blue ribbon. Cupping it in
one palm, he unrolled it with a gentle finger. The message upon it was in
the southern tongue of Nabban and the Church, but the letters were stark
Rimmersgard runes.

     Morgen—

     The fires of Stormspike have been lit. From Tungoldyr I have seen
  their smokes nine days, and their flames eight nights. The White Foxes
  are awake again, and in the darkness they trouble the children. I have
  also sent winged words to our smallest friend, but I doubt they will
  find him unawares. Someone has been knocking at dangerous doors.

                                                              —Jarnauga

   Beside the signature the author had drawn a crude feather in a circle.
   “Odd weather, is it not?” a dry voice said. “And yet so pleasant for
walking on the battlements.”
   The doctor whirled, crumpling the parchment in his hand. Pryrates stood
at his shoulder, smiling.
   “The air is full of birds today,” the priest said. “Are you a student of
birds, doctor? Do you know much of their habits?”
   “I have some small knowledge of them,” Morgenes said quietly. His blue
eyes were narrowed.
   “I myself have thought of studying them,” Pryrates nodded. “They are
easily captured, you know . . . and they hold so many secrets that the
inquiring mind would find valuable.” He sighed and rubbed his smooth
chin. “Ah, well, merely another thing to consider—my time is so full
already. Good day, doctor. Enjoy the air.” He moved off down the
battlement, boots clicking on the stone.
   For a long while after the priest had gone Morgenes stood quietly, staring
at the blue-gray northern sky.