
                      Bitter Air and Sweet




It was late in the month of Jonever. The rains had still not come. As
the sun began to sink behind the western walls, and insects gossiped in the
tall dry grass, Simon and Jeremias the chandler’s boy sat back to back and
panting.
   “Come on, then.” Simon forced himself to his feet. “Let’s have another
go.” Jeremias, now unsupported, slumped backward until he lay
outstretched in the scratchy grass like an upended tortoise.
   “You go on,” he wheezed. “I’ll never be a soldier.”
   “Of course you will,” said Simon, annoyed at such talk. “We both will.
You were much better last time. Come on, get up.”
   With a groan of pain Jeremias allowed himself to be tugged upright. He
reluctantly took the barrel stave Simon handed to him.
   “Let’s go in, Simon. I hurt all over.”
   “You think too much,” Simon responded, and lifted his own stave. “Have
at you!” Stave smacked on stave.
   “Ouch!” Simon yelped.
   “Ho, ho!” chortled Jeremias, much heartened. “A mortal blow!” The
clicking and smacking resumed.

                                    •••

   It had not been just his unsuccessful flirtation with Hepzibah that
reawakened Simon’s old fascination with the glories of the military life.
Before Elias had come to the throne Simon had felt sure that his true desire
—the one for which he would give anything—was to be Morgenes’
apprentice, and to learn all the secrets of the doctor’s muddled, magical
world. But now that he had it, and had replaced plodding Inch as the
doctor’s helper, the glory had begun to pale. There was so much work, for
one thing, and Morgenes was so damnably rigorous about everything. And
had Simon learned to do any magic at all? He had not. Placed against hours
of reading and writing and sweeping and polishing in the doctor’s dark
chamber, great deeds on the battlefield and the admiring glances of young
women were not to be sneered at.
   Deep in Jakob the Chandler’s tallow-scented den, fat Jeremias had also
been caught up in the martial splendor of the king’s first year. During the
week-long pageants that Elias seemed to hold virtually every month, all the
color of the realm settled on the jousting lists, the knights like shiny
butterflies of silk and gleaming steel, far more beautiful than any mortal
thing. The glory-spiced wind that blew across the tournament field
awakened deep longings in the breasts of young men.
   Simon and Jeremias went to the cooper for long slats to fashion into
swords, just as they had in childhood. They traded blows together for hours
after chores were finished, at first staging their mock battles in the stables
until Shem Horsegroom threw them out for the peace of his wards, then
moving to the unmowed grass just south of the tourney field. Night after
night Simon came limping back to the servant’s quarters, breeches snagged
and shirt torn, and Rachel the Dragon turned up her eyes and prayed aloud
for Saint Rhiap to save her from the blockheadedness of boys, then rolled
up her sleeves and added some bruises to those Simon had already
garnered.

                                     •••

  “I think . . .” Simon puffed, “that’s . . . enough.” Jeremias, pink-faced and
doubled over, could only nod his agreement.
  As they trooped back toward the castle in the fading light, sweating and
huffing like plow oxen, Simon noted with approval that Jeremias was
beginning to lose some of his lumpishness. Another month or so and he
would begin to resemble a soldier. Before their regular dueling began, he
had looked more like something his master might put a wick into.
   “That was good today, wasn’t it?” Simon asked. Jeremias rubbed his
head through his cropped hair and gave Simon a look of disgust.
   “I don’t know how you talked me into this,” he grumbled. “They will
never let folk like us be anything but cook-fire boys.”
   “But on the field of battle anything can happen!” Simon said. “You might
save the king’s life from Thrithings-men or Naraxi raiders—and be
knighted on the spot!”
   “Hmmm.” Jeremias was not impressed. “And how are we going to get
them to take us in the first place, with no families, nor horses, nor swords
even?” He waggled his stave.
   “Yes,” said Simon, “well . . . well then, I’ll think of something.”
   “Hmmm,” agreed Jeremias, and mopped his flushed face with the hem of
his tunic.
   The flare of torchlight sprang up before them in a score of places as they
neared the castle walls. What had been open, grassy space in the shadow of
the Hayholt’s outwall was now an infestation of wretched huts and tents,
piled together and overlapping each other like the scales of an old, sick
lizard. The grass was long gone, cropped to the soil by sheep and goats. As
the ragged shanty dwellers milled about, setting up their campfires for the
night and calling their children in ahead of the darkness, the dust kicked
into gritty plumes that swirled briefly before settling, dyeing clothes and
tent-fabric alike a dusky gray-brown.
   “If it doesn’t rain soon,” said Jeremias, frowning at a pack of shrieking
children who tugged at the faded garments of a faded-looking woman, “the
Erkynguard will have to drive them away. We don’t have enough water to
keep giving it to them. Let them go and dig their own wells.”
   “But where . . .” Simon started to ask, then broke off, staring. Down at
the end of one of the squatter-town byways he saw what seemed a familiar
face. It had appeared for only a moment in a crowd, then disappeared, but
he was sure it was that of the boy he had caught spying, the one who had
left him to the wrath of the sexton Barnabas.
   “It’s that one I told you about!” he hissed excitedly. Jeremias looked
back without comprehension. “You know, Mal . . . Malachias! I owe him
something!” Simon reached the knot of people where he felt sure he had
seen the spy’s sharp-featured face. They were mostly women and young
children, but a few older men stood among them, bent and withered like old
trees. They had surrounded a young woman crouching on the ground before
the opening to a half-tumbled hovel, which backed directly onto the stone
of the great outwall. She held the pale body of a tiny child in her lap as she
rocked herself from side to side, weeping. Malachias was nowhere in sight.
   Simon looked at the impassive, battered faces around him, and then
down at the crying woman.
   “Is the child sick?” he asked someone next to him. “I am Doctor
Morgenes’ apprentice. Should I go and fetch him?”
   An old woman turned her face up to him. Her eyes, set in an intricate net
of dirty wrinkles, were as harsh and dark as a bird’s.
   “Get away from us, castle man,” she said, and spat into the dirt. “King’s
man. Just get away.”
   “But I want to help . . .” Simon began, when a strong hand gripped his
elbow.
   “Do what she says, lad.” It was a wiry old man with a matted beard. The
look on his face was not unkind as he tugged Simon away from the circle.
“You can do nought here, and people are bad angry. The child is dead. Go
on with you.” He gave Simon a gentle but firm push.
   Jeremias was still standing in the same spot when Simon returned. The
campfires all around outlined his worried expression in flickering light.
   “Don’t do that, Simon,” he whined. “I don’t like it out here, especially
after the sun has gone down.”
   “They looked at me like they hated me,” Simon murmured, puzzled and
upset, but Jeremias was already hurrying ahead.




  None of the torches were lit, but strange, smoky light filled the long hall.
He could see not a soul stirring anywhere in the Hayholt, but down every
passageway echoed the sound of voices lifted in song and laughter.
  Simon moved from one room to another, pulling aside curtains, opening
pantry doors, but still could find no one. The voices seemed almost to mock
him as he searched—now swelling in volume, now diminishing, chanting
and singing in a hundred different languages not one of them his own.
   At last he stood before the door of the throne room. The voices were
louder than ever, all seeming to cry out from inside the great chamber. He
reached a hand down; the door was not locked. As he pushed it open the
voices stilled, as though startled into silence by the creak of the hinges. The
misty light poured out past him like shimmering smoke. He stepped inside.
   The yellowing throne, the Dragonbone Chair, stood in the room’s center.
Around it danced a linked circle of figures, hands clasped, moving as slowly
as though they were in deep, deep water. He recognized several; Judith,
Rachel, Jakob the Chandler and other castle folk, their faces stretched with
wild merriment as they bowed and capered. Among them moved dancers
more grand: King Elias, Guthwulf of Utanyeat, Gwythinn of Hernystir;
these, like the castle folk, wheeled as slowly and deliberately as ageless ice
grinding mountains down to dust. Scattered about the silent circle were
looming figures, shiny-black as beetles—the malachite kings come down
from their pedestals to join the sluggish festivity. And in the middle bulked
the great chair, a skull-peaked mountain of dull ivory that seemed somehow
full of vitality, suffused with an ancient energy that held the circling dancers
by taut, invisible reins.
   The throne room was silent but for a thin thread of melody that wavered
in the air: the Cansim Falis, the Hymn to Joy. The tune was stretched and
discomforting, as if the invisible hands that plucked it out were not made to
handle earthly instruments.
   Simon felt himself drawn toward the terrible dance, as to a whirlpool; he
dragged his feet, but still moved inexorably inward. The dancers’ heads
turned toward his approach with a slow twisting motion like the unwinding
of crumpled stems of grass.
   In the center of the ring, on the Dragonbone Chair itself, a darkness was
coalescing—a darkness of many flittering parts, like a cloud of flies. Near
the top of this swarming, rolling dark, two smoldering sparks of crimson
began to brighten, as though fanned by a sudden breeze.
   The dancers were staring at him now as they swam by, mouthing his
name: Simon, Simon, Simon . . . On the far side of the ring, beyond the
crawling obscurity on the throne, a gap opened: two clasped hands sliding
apart like the tearing of a rotted rag.
   As the opening moved around to him, one of the hands fluttered out in
fishlike undulation. It was Rachel’s, and as she neared she beckoned to him.
Instead of her usual look of suspicion, her face was set in lines of desperate
cheerfulness. She reached out: across from her fat Jeremias held the gap
open, a dull smile on his pale features.
   “Come boy . . .” Rachel said, or at least it was her lips that moved—the
voice soft and hoarse, was a man’s. “Come, can you not feel the place we
have left for you? A place especially prepared?”
   The grasping hand caught at his collar and began to pull him into the
dance’s orbit. He struggled, slapping at the clammy fingers, but his arms
were strengthless. Rachel’s and Jeremias’ lips split in wide grins. The voice
deepened.
   “Boy! Don’t you hear me?! Come on, boy!”
   “No!” The cry came out at last, leaping from the prison of Simon’s
constricted throat. “No! I won’t! No!”
   “Oh, Frayja’s Garters, boy, wake up! You’ve woken everyone else!” The
hand shook him again, roughly, and there was a sudden gleam of light.
Simon sat up, tried to scream and fell back in a coughing fit. A dark shape
leaned over him, starkly outlined by an oil lamp.
   Actually the boy hasn’t really wakened anyone, Isgrimnur realized. The
rest of ’em have been tossing and moaning since I walked in—like they were
all having the same nightmare. What a gods-cursed strange night!
   The duke watched as the restless shapes around him slowly lapsed back
into quietude, then returned his attention to the boy.
   Look there—the little puppy is coughing something fierce. Truthfully,
though, he’s not so little—just thin as a starveling colt.
   Isgrimnur put the lantern down in a niche, then pulled the sheet of
homespun stretched across the alcove to one side, so he could get a good
grip on the youth’s shoulder. He pulled the boy upright in bed and gave him
a firm swat on the back. The boy coughed once more and then stopped.
Isgrimnur patted him a few more times with a wide, hairy hand.
   “Sorry, fellow, sorry. Take your time, there.”
   While the youth regained his breath the Duke looked around the
curtained-off alcove in which the boy’s slat bed was set. From beyond the
drooping cloth came the murmuring night-sounds of the dozen or so
scullions bedded nearby.
    Isgrimnur picked up the lantern again, peering at the odd shapes pegged
on the shadowed wall: an unraveling bird’s nest, a silky streamer—it looked
green in the poor lamplight—that had probably come from some knight’s
festival gear. Nearby, also hanging from nails driven into cracks, were a
hawk feather, a crude wooden Tree, and a picture whose ragged edge
showed it to be torn from a book. Squinting, Isgrimnur thought he could
make out a staring man with wild hair standing out from his head . . . or
were they antlers . . . ?
    When he looked down again, smiling to himself at the unholy clutter of
younglings, the boy had regained his breath. He was looking up at the duke
with wide, nervous eyes.
    With that nose and thatch of—what is it, red?—hair, the boy looks like a
be-damned marsh bird, Isgrimnur thought.
    “Sorry to startle you,” the old duke said, “but you were closest to the
door. I need to speak to Towser—the jester. Do you know who he is?” The
boy nodded, watching his face intently. Good, thought the Rimmersman, at
least he isn’t simple-minded. “I was told that he dossed down here tonight,
but I don’t see him. Where is he?”
    “You’re . . . you’re . . .” The youth was having trouble coming out with
it.
    “Yes, I’m the Duke of Elvritshalla—and don’t start in bowing and ‘sir’-
ing. Just tell me where the jester is and I’ll let you back to sleep.”
    Without another word the boy slid off his pallet and stood up, pulling his
blanket free and wrapping it about his shoulders. The hem of his shirt hung
down below, flapping against bare legs as he stepped over the slumbering
men around him, some of whom lay wrapped in their cloaks in the middle
of the floor as though they had not been able to make it all the way to their
beds. Isgrimnur followed with the lamp, stepping carefully over the dark
forms as though he followed one of Udun’s ghost-maidens through a field
of battle-slain.
    They went through two more rooms this way, the big spirit and the small,
the larger just as silent for all his bulk. In the last room a few dim coals
sparkled in the fireplace. On the bricks before the grate, curled in a nest of
coats and with a sheepskin winebag still gripped in his horny old fist,
Towser the jester lay snoring and mumbling.
    “Ah,” Isgrimnur grunted. “Well, thanks then, boy. Go back to your bed
with my apologies—although I think you were dreaming a dream you’d be
just as happy to wake from. Go on now.”
    The youth turned and went back past Isgrimnur toward the doorway. As
he brushed by, the duke was mildly surprised to note that the youth was
nearly as tall as he was—and Isgrimnur was not a small man. It was the
boy’s slenderness, and the way he hunched when he walked, that made his
size less evident.
    It’s a pity nobody’s taught that one to stand up, he thought. And most
likely he never will learn in the kitchens, or wherever.
    When the youth had disappeared a moment later, Isgrimnur bent and
shook Towser—gently at first, then with increasing vigor as it became
apparent that the little man was well and truly swotted; even the firmest
agitation produced only faint noises of protest. At last Isgrimnur’s patience
ended. He bent down, clutching one of the older man’s ankles in each hand,
and pulled them up in the air until Towser dangled upside down, only the
crown of his bald head touching the floor. Towser’s grumbling turned to
gurgles of discomfort, and at last became good, understandable Westerling
words.
    “What . . . ? . . . Down! Put . . . down, Aed’n damn you . . .”
    “If you don’t wake up, old souse, I shall knock your head against the
ground until you think wine is poison forever!” Isgrimnur wedded word to
deed, lifting the jester’s ankles a few hand-spans, then setting his head back
down none too gently on the cold stone.
    “Desist! Demon, I . . . surrender! Turn me ’round, man, turn me ’round—
I am not Usires, to hang heels-o’er-head for the instruction of . . . of the
masses!”
    Isgrimnur lowered him gently until the little jester lay stretched full
length on his back.
    “Don’t add blasphemy to besottedness, old fool,” Isgrimnur growled.
Watching Towser roll painfully onto his stomach, the duke failed to see a
slender shadow take up a position in the doorway behind him.
    “Oh, merciful, merciful Aedon,” Towser groaned as he levered himself
into a sitting position, “did you have to use my head for a digging stick? If
it is a well you wish to scrape, I could have told you the ground is too stony
here in the servant’s chambers.”
   “Enough, Towser. I didn’t wake you two hours before sunrise to bandy
jokes. Josua is gone.”
   Towser rubbed his crown, searching blindly with the other hand for his
wineskin. “Gone where, Isgrimnur? For pity’s sake, man, have you broken
my pate because Josua failed to meet you somewhere? I had nothing to do
with it, I promise you.” He took a long, self-pitying swig from the bag.
   “Idiot,” Isgrimnur said, but his tone was not harsh. “I mean the prince is
gone. Left the Hayholt.”
   “Impossible,” said Towser firmly, recovering some of his self-possession
with his second trembling swallow of malmsey. “He is not leaving until
next week. He said so. He told me I could go with him if I wished then, and
be his jester at Naglimund.” Towser leaned his head to the side and spat. “I
told him I would give him my answer tomorrow—today, I suppose now—
since Elias doesn’t seem to care if I stay or I go.” He shook his head. “And
me his father’s dearest companion . . .”
   Isgrimnur shook his head impatiently, his gray-shot beard wagging. “No,
man, he is gone. Left sometime after middle-night, as far as I can tell—or
so said the Erkynguardsman I found at his empty chamber when I went to
keep a meeting-time with him. He had asked me to come so late, though I
would have rather been abed, but he said it was something that would not
wait. Does that sound like a man who would leave without even a message
for me?”
   “Who knows?” said Towser, his wrinkled face screwed up as he
pondered. “Mayhap that is why he wished to speak to you—because he was
leaving secretly.”
   “Then why did he not wait till I arrived? I do not like it.” Isgrimnur
squatted down and poked at the coals with a stick lying there. “There is a
queer air in the halls of this house tonight.”
   “Josua is often strange in his actions,” said Towser with calm assurance.
“He is moody—by the Lord, is he moody! He has probably gone out to hunt
owls by moonlight, or some other tricksy pastime. Fear not.”
   After a long moment of silence, Isgrimnur let out a long breath. “Ah, I
am sure you’re right,” he said, and his tone was quite nearly convincing.
“Even were he and Elias at open odds, nothing could ever happen here in
his father’s house, before God and the court.”
   “Nothing but you thumping me on the head in the middle-night. God
seems to be a bit slow in doling out punishments tonight.” Towser grinned a
wrinkly grin.
   As the two men carried on their talking, voices hushed near the dull
embers, Simon stole quietly back to his bed. He lay awake for some long
time wrapped in his blanket, staring up into the darkness; but by the time
the cock in the court yard below finally saw the sun’s first rising glow, he
had fallen back into sleep.




   “Now you just remember,” Morgenes cautioned, wiping the sweat from
his forehead with a bright blue kerchief, “—don’t eat anything until you’ve
brought it back and asked me. Especially if it has red spots. Understood?
Many of the articles I’ve asked you to gather are direst poison. Avoid
stupidity, if such a thing is possible. Simon, you are in charge, boy. I hold
you responsible for the safety of the others.”
   The others were Jeremias the chandler’s lad and Isaak, a young page
from the upstairs residence. The doctor had picked this hot Feyever
afternoon to organize a mushroom and herb-hunting expedition to the
Kynswood, a small forest of less than a hundred acres that huddled on the
high bank of the Kynslagh along the Hayholt’s western wall. Because of the
drought, Morgenes’ supplies of important commodities had dwindled
alarmingly, and the Kynswood, standing as it did beside the great lake,
seemed a good place to search for the doctor’s moisture-loving treasures.
   As they fanned out through the forest, Jeremias hung back, waiting until
the sound of Morgenes’ crunching footsteps had diminished into the crackly
brown undergrowth.
   “Have you asked him yet?” Jeremias’ clothes were already so wet with
perspiration that they clung.
   “No.” Simon had squatted down to watch a press-gang of ants hurrying
single file up the trunk of a Vestivegg pine. “I’m going to do it today. I just
have to think of the right way to do it.”
   “What if he says no?” Jeremias eyed the procession with some distaste.
“What will we do then?”
   “He won’t say no.” Simon stood up. “And if he does . . . well, I’ll think
of something.”
   “What are you two whispering about?” Young Isaak had reappeared in
the clearing. “It’s not right to keep secrets.” Though he was some three or
four years younger than Simon and Jeremias, Isaak had already developed
an “upstairs” tone. Simon scowled at him.
   “Never you mind.”
   “We were looking at this tree,” Jeremias offered, quick to feel guilt.
   “I should have thought,” Isaak said archly, “that there were plenty of
trees to look at without skulking and telling secrets.”
   “Oh, but this one,” Jeremias began, “This one is . . .”
   “Forget the stupid tree,” said Simon in disgust. “Let’s go. Morgenes had
gotten the jump on us, and will let us know if he outgathers us.” He ducked
a branch and waded into the ankle-high tangle of undergrowth.

                                    •••

   It was hard work; when they stopped to drink water and rest in the shade
some hour and a half later, all three of the boys were covered in fine red
dust up to their elbows and knees. Each carried a small bundle of goods
wrapped in his kerchief: Simon’s the largest, Isaak’s and Jeremias’ of more
modest size. They found a large spruce which they shared as a backrest,
dusty legs fanning out around it like the spokes on a wheel. Simon tossed a
stone across the clearing; it thumped into a pile of broken branches, setting
dead leaves a-tremble.
   “Why is it so hot?” moaned Jeremias, swabbing his brow. “And why is
my handkerchief full of ridiculous mushrooms, so that I have to wipe the
sweat away with my hands?” He held up slick, wet palms.
   “It’s hot because it’s hot,” Simon grumbled. “Because there’s no rain.
And that’s that.”
   A longish stretch of time passed in silence. Even the insects and birds
seemed to have disappeared, gone to dark places to sleep the dry, still
afternoon away in silence.
   “I suppose we should be glad we are not at Meremund,” said Jeremias at
last. “They say that a thousand have died there from the plague.”
   “A thousand?” said Isaak, scornful. The heat had brought high color to
his thin, pale face. “Thousands! It is the talk of the residence. My master
goes about the Hayholt with a kerchief doused in holy water clapped to his
face, and the plague has not come within a hundred leagues of here.”
   “Does your master know what is happening in Meremund?” Simon
asked, interested—Isaak did have his uses. “Does he speak of it to you?”
   “All the time,” The young page was smug. “His wife’s brother is the
mayor. They were among the first to flee the plague. He has gotten much
news from them.”
   “Elias made Guthwulf of Utanyeat the King’s Hand,” said Simon.
Jeremias groaned and slid away from the trunk, stretching out full-length on
the pine needle-matted ground.
   “That’s right,” Isaak replied, scratching in the dirt with a long twig. “And
he has kept the plague there. It has not spread.”
   “What caused it, this pestilence?” Simon asked. “Do any of the residence
people know?” He felt stupid asking questions of a child so much younger
than himself, but Isaak did hear the upstairs gossip and was not reticent in
sharing it.
   “Nobody knows for sure. Some people say that jealous Hernystir
merchants from Abaingeat across the river poisoned the wells. Many people
in Abaingeat have died, too.” Isaak said this with a certain air of satisfaction
—after all, the Hernystiri were not Aedonites but heathens, however noble
an ally the House of Lluth might be under the High King’s Ward. “Others
say that the drought has cracked the earth with dryness, and poisonous airs
have escaped from the ground. Whatever it is, my master says that it spares
nobody, rich man, priest, or peasant. You first become hot and
feverish . . .”—Jeremias, on his back, groaned and mopped at his forehead
—“. . . then you blister up, like you had laid on hot coals. Then the blisters
begin to ooze . . .” He emphasized this last word with a childish grimace,
fine blond hair hanging in his flushed face. “And then you die. Painfully.”
   The forest breathed heat around them as they sat without speaking.
   “My master Jakob,” Jeremias said at last, “fears that the plague shall
come to the Hayholt, on account of all the dirty peasants living by the
walls.” The Kynswood took another slow breath. “Ruben the Bear, the
blacksmith, told my master that he had gotten news from a mendicant friar
that Guthwulf has taken very harsh measures in Meremund.”
   “Harsh measures?” Simon asked, eyes closed. “What does that mean?”
   “The friar told Ruben that Guthwulf, when he arrived in Meremund as
King’s Hand, took the Erkynguard and went to the homes of the sick. They
took hammers, nails, and boards, and sealed the houses up.”
   “With the people inside?” Simon asked, horrified but fascinated.
   “Of course. To stop the spread of plague. They boarded up the houses so
families of the diseased could not run away and spread the plague to
others.” Jeremias raised his sleeve and mopped again.
   “But I thought the plague came from bad airs, from the ground?”
   “Even so, it can be spread. That is why so many priests and monks and
leeches have died. The friar said that at night, for many weeks, the streets of
Meremund were . . . were . . . what did he say . . . ? ‘Like the Halls of Hell.’
You could hear the people howling like dogs in the boarded-up houses.
Finally, when they all went silent, Guthwulf and the Erkynguard burned
them. Unopened.”
   As Simon marveled at this last detail, there was a sound of breaking
branches.
   “Ho there, you lazy lumps!” Morgenes appeared from a knot of trees, his
robes festooned with twigs and leaves, a fringe of moss clinging to the brim
of his wide hat. “I should have known I would find you flat on your backs.”
   Simon struggled to his feet. “We have only been sitting a short while,
Doctor,” he said. “We gathered for a long time.”
   “Don’t forget to ask him!” hissed Jeremias, pulling himself up.
   “Well,” Morgenes said, eyeing their bundles critically. “I suppose you
have not done badly, considering the conditions. Let me see what you have
found.” He squatted like a farmer weeding a hedgerow and began sifting
through the boy’s collections. “Ah! Devil’s Ear!” he cried, holding a
scalloped mushroom up to the shaft of sunlight. “Excellent!”
   “Doctor,” Simon said, “I wanted to ask you a favor.”
   “Hmmm?” Morgenes was poking through bits of fungus, using an
unrolled kerchief as a table.
   “Well, Jeremias is interested in joining the guards—or trying to. The
problem is, Count Breyugar knows us castle folk hardly at all, and Jeremias
has no connection into such circles.”
   “That,” said Morgenes dryly, “is no surprise.” He emptied out the next
kerchief.
   “Do you think you could write him a letter of introduction? You are well
known to all.” Simon tried to keep his voice calm. Isaak looked at sweating
Jeremias with a mixture of respect and amusement.
   “Hmmm.” The doctor’s tone was neutral. “I suspect I am only too well
known to Breyugar and his friends.” He looked up, fixing Jeremias with a
sharp eye. “Does Jakob know?”
   “He . . . he knows my feelings,” stammered Jeremias.
   Morgenes bundled all the gatherings together in a sack and returned the
boy’s kerchiefs. The doctor stood, shaking the clinging leaves and tree
needles from his robe.
   “I suppose I could,” he said, as they started back toward the Hayholt. “I
don’t think I approve—and I don’t think a note from me will quite bring
them to respectful attention—but I suppose if Jakob knows, then it’s all
right.” They waded single file through the scratching thicket.
   “Thank you, Doctor,” said Jeremias breathlessly, struggling to keep up.
   “I doubt they shall want you.” Isaak sounded a little envious. As they
moved closer to the castle, his haughtiness seemed to return apace.
   “Doctor Morgenes,” Simon said, mustering as best he could a tone of
benign unconcern, “why don’t I write the letter, and then you can look at it
and sign it? It would be good practice for me, don’t you think?”
   “Why, Simon,” the doctor said, stepping over a fallen tree trunk, “that’s
an excellent idea. I’m glad to see you take such initiative. Maybe I will
make a true apprentice of you yet.”
   The doctor’s cheerful statement, his tone of pride, weighed Simon down
like a cape of lead. He hadn’t done anything yet, let alone anything bad, and
already he felt like a murderer or some worse thing. He was about to say
something else when the stifling forest air was ripped by a scream.
   Simon turned around to see Jeremias, his face white as wheat paste,
pointing at something in a thicket beside the fallen log. Isaak stood beside
him, frozen in shock. Simon hurried back, Morgenes only a step behind
him.
   It was a corpse, lying tumbled half-in and half-out of the thicket.
Although the face was mostly covered by bushes, the near-fleshless state of
the exposed parts showed that the body had been dead for some time.
   “Oh, oh, oh,” gasped Jeremias, “he’s dead! Are there outlaws here? What
shall we do?”
   “Oh, hush,” snapped Morgenes. “That will be a start. Let me have a
look.” The doctor picked up the hem of his robe and waded forward into the
thicket, then stopped and gingerly lifted the branches that masked much of
the body.
   From the tendrils of beard that still clung to his bird-and-insect-gnawed
face, he seemed to have been a northerner—a Rimmersman perhaps. He
wore unremarkable traveling clothes, a light wool cloak and tanned leather
boots, rotting now so that bits of the fur lining showed through.
   “How did he die?” asked Simon. The eyeless sockets, dark and secretive,
unnerved him. The toothy mouth, flesh shrunken and pulled away, seemed
to be grinning, as though the cadaver had been lying here for weeks
enjoying a bleak joke.
   Morgenes used a stick to pull the tunic aside. A few flies rose lazily and
circled. “Look,” he said.
   From a puckered hole in the corpse’s desiccated trunk rose the stump of
an arrow, broken off a handsbreadth above the ribs.
   “Done by someone in a hurry, perhaps—someone who did not want their
arrow recognized.”
   They had to wait a moment for Isaak to finish being noisily ill before
they could hurry on to the castle.