
                        Smoke on the Wind




“Did you get it? Did he guess?” Still pale for all his hours in the sun,
Jeremias bobbed along at Simon’s side like the sheep’s-bladder float on a
fisherman’s net.
   “I’ve got it,” Simon growled. Jeremias’ agitation irritated him; it seemed
out of keeping with the masculine gravity of their mission. “You think too
much.”
   Jeremias took no offense. “As long as you’ve got it,” he said.
   Main Row, open to the harsh noontide sky, tent-roofing skinned back,
was nearly deserted. Here and there the constabulary guard—yellow-
liveried to show their immediate allegiance to Count Breyugar, bearing
sashes of Elias’ royal green—lounged in the doorways or diced with one
another against the walls of shuttered shops. Even though the morning
market was long over, still it seemed to Simon that there were fewer
common people in the streets than was usual. Those to be seen were mostly
the homeless who had been flooding into Erchester in the recent winter
months, driven out of the countryside by drying streams and failing wells.
They stood or sat in the shadows of stone walls and buildings, knots of
indifference, their movements slow and purposeless. The constables pushed
past or stepped over them as though they were dogs in the street.
   The pair turned right off of Main Row onto Tavern Way, the largest of
the thoroughfares running perpendicular to the Row. Here there was more
activity, although still the largest number of folk in sight were soldiers. The
heat had driven most of them indoors; they leaned out of the low windows
with flagons in their hands, watching Simon and Jeremias and the half a
dozen or so other pedestrians with beery disinterest.
    A peasant girl in a homespun skirt—some ostler’s daughter most likely,
by the jug she balanced on her shoulder—hurried past up the street. A few
soldiers whistled and called out to her, spilling great sloshes of beer into the
dust below the tavern windowsills. The girl did not look up as she trotted
by, chin on chest. Her haste, combined with the heavy jug, kept her steps
short. Simon watched the fluid sway of her hips appreciatively, even turning
completely around to keep her in view until she swooped abruptly into an
alleyway and disappeared.
    “Simon, come on!” Jeremias called. “There it is!”
    In the middle of the block of buildings, standing up from Tavern Row
like a rock in a rutted road, stood Saint Sutrin’s cathedral. The stone of its
great face dully reflected the patient sun. Its tall arches and vaulting
buttresses cast thin shadows over the nests of gargoyles, whose lively,
twisted faces peered down happily, cackling and joking over the shoulders
of the humorless saints. Three limp pennants hung from the flagpole over
the high double doors: Elias’ green dragon, the Pillar and Tree of the
church, and at the bottom the gold coronet of Erchester-town on a white
field. A pair of constabulary guards leaned on the open doors, their pikes
point down in the wide stone doorway.
    “Well, here’s for it,” said Simon grimly, and with Jeremias trotting at his
heels he made his way up the two dozen marble steps. At the top one of the
guards lifted his pike lazily and barred their entrance. His chain mail hood
was pulled back, hanging like a veil across his shoulders.
    “What do you want, then?” he asked, narrowing his eyes.
    “A message for Breyugar.” Simon was embarrassed to hear his voice
break. “For Count Breyugar, from Doctor Morgenes at the Hayholt.” A
little defiantly, he thrust out the rolled parchment. The guardsman who had
spoken took it and gave the seal a cursory glance. The other was staring
intently up at the carved door-lintel, as if hoping to see written there his
dismissal from duty for the day.
    The first guard handed the parchment back with a shrug. “Inside and to
the left. Don’t be scamping about.”
    Simon drew himself up to his full height, indignant. When he was a
guardsman, he would carry himself with a great deal more style than these
bored, unshaven idiots. Didn’t they know what an honor it was to wear the
king’s green? He and Jeremias climbed past them into Saint Sutrin’s cool
interior.
   Nothing moved in the antechamber, not even the air, but Simon could see
the play of light on figures in motion beyond the far doorway. Instead of
going directly to the door on the left, he looked back to see if the guards
were watching—they weren’t, of course—then strode forward to look into
the cathedral’s grand chapel.
   “Simon!” Jeremias hissed, alarmed. “What are you doing?! They said
over there!” He pointed to the leftmost doorway.
   Ignoring his companion, Simon leaned his head through the doorway.
Jeremias, muttering nervously, came up behind.
   It’s like one of those religious pictures, Simon thought. Where you see
Usires and the Tree way in the back, and the faces of Nabbanai peasants
and all very close up front.
   Indeed, the chapel was so large and high-ceilinged that it seemed a whole
world. Sunlight, softened by the colored windows as though by clouds,
streamed down from the uppermost reaches. White-robed priests moved
around the altar, cleaning and polishing like shaven-headed chambermaids.
Simon supposed they were preparing for the Elysiamansa services only a
week or two away.
   Closer to the door, moving equally busily but with no other common
reference, Breyugar’s yellow-tunicked constables milled back and forth on
various errands, dotted here and there with the green of one of the castle’s
Erkynguard, or the dun or black clothes of some Erchester notable. The two
groups seemed completely separated; it took a moment for Simon to see the
row of boards and stools that had been mounted between the front and back
of the cathedral. In a flash of insight, Simon realized that it was not a fence
to keep the scurrying priests in, as was the first impression—no, rather it
was to keep the soldiers out. It seemed that Bishop Domitis and the priests
had still not given up hope that the Lord Constable’s occupation of their
cathedral would be less than permanent.
   As they climbed the stairs, they had to show their parchment to three
more guards in turn, all of these more alert than those at the massive front
door—either because they were inside out of the sun, or else due to their
increased proximity to the object of protection. At last they stood in a
crowded guardroom before a seam-faced, gap-toothed veteran whose belt
full of keys and air of harried disinterest bespoke authority.
   “Yes, the Lord Breyugar’s here today. Give me the letter, and I’ll be
passing it on.” The sergeant scratched his chin impassively.
   “No, sir, we must give it to him. It’s from Doctor Morgenes.” Simon
tried to sound firm. Jeremias was staring at the floor.
   “Oh, is it then? Well, think of that.” The man spat on the sawdust-
covered floor. Here and there the gleam of marble tiles showed through.
“Aedon bite me, what a day. Wait here, then.”

                                    •••

   “So, what have we here?” Count Breyugar, sitting at the table beside the
bony remnants of a meal of small birds, raised an eyebrow. He had delicate
features, nearly lost in jowly flesh, and the hands of a musician—fine, long-
fingered hands.
   “A letter, my Lord.” Simon, on one knee, extended the tube of
parchment.
   “Well give it to me, then, boy. Can’t you see I’m at dinner?” The count’s
voice was high-pitched and effeminate, but Simon had heard that Breyugar
was a terrifying swordsman—those slender hands had killed many men.
   As the count read the message, lips moving, shiny with grease, Simon
tried to keep his shoulders straight and his back stiff as a pike handle. Out
of the corner of his eye he thought he saw the grizzled sergeant looking at
him, so he tilted his chin back and stared straight ahead, thinking about
what a favorable comparison he must make to the slouching dullards on
watch at the cathedral doors.
   “. . . Please consider the . . . bearers . . . for service under your
Lordship’s guidance . . .” Breyugar read aloud. His emphasis gave Simon a
panicky moment—had he noticed the ‘s’ Simon had added to ‘bearer’? He
had made it a bit squeezy so it would fit.
   Count Breyugar, his eyes on Simon, handed the letter to the staff
sergeant. As the sergeant read, slower even than Breyugar, the nobleman
looked the youth up and down, then flicked a brief glance to the still-
kneeling Jeremias. When the sergeant handed the letter back, he wore a
smile that showed two teeth missing, and a pink tongue probing in the dark
gulf.
   “So.” Breyugar fluted the sound like a sorrowful breath. “Morgenes, the
old apothecary, wants me to take on a couple of castle-mice and turn them
into men.” He picked up a tiny haunch from his plate and chewed on the
bone. “Impossible.”
   Simon felt his knees buckle and his stomach push up toward his throat.
“But . . . but why?” he stammered.
   “Because I don’t need you. I have fighting men enough. I can’t afford
you. No one can plant if it doesn’t rain, and I have men lined up already
looking for a job of work that will feed them. But most important, I don’t
want you—a couple of suet-soft castle boys who have felt nothing more
painful in their lives than a smack on their pink arses for stealing cherries.
Go on with you. If war comes, if those sneering heathen in Hernystir
continue to resist the king’s will, or treacherous Josua turns up, then you
can carry a pitchfork or scythe with the rest of the peasants—maybe you
can even follow the army and water the horses, if manpower gets short
enough. But you’ll never be soldiers. The king didn’t make me Lord
Constable to nursemaid groundlings. Sergeant, show these castle-mice a
hole to scamper out.”
   Neither Simon or Jeremias said a word all the long journey back to the
Hayholt. When Simon was alone in his curtained alcove he broke his barrel-
stave sword over his knee. He did not cry. He would not cry.




   There is something strange in the north wind today, thought Isgrimnur.
Something that smells like an animal, or a storm about to happen, or
both . . . some scratchy thing that puts the hair on my neck right up.
   He rubbed his hands together as though the air were cold, which it was
not, and pushed the sleeves of his light summer tunic—worn months early
in this oddest of years—up over his corded old forearms. He went again to
the doorway and looked out, feeling embarrassed that an old soldier like
himself should be playing such stripling’s games.
   Where is that damned Hernystirman?
   Turning to pace again he nearly tripped over a stack of writing boxes,
instead catching a boot buckle in the bottommost of a small pyramid of
parchment scrolls that hemmed in his confined walking space. Cursing
roundly, he bent in time to keep the arrangement from toppling. Certainly
the deserted room in the Hall of Records, emptied so that the writing-priests
could make their Elysiamansa observances, was as good a place as could be
found on short notice for a clandestine meeting—but why couldn’t they
leave enough room among their damned daubings for a grown man to move
around?
   The door latch rattled. Duke Isgrimnur, relieved of waiting at last, sprang
forward. Instead of peering out cautiously he flung the door open to find not
two men, as expected, but one.
   “Praise Aedon you’re here, Eolair!” he barked. “Where’s the escritor?”
   “Sshh.” The Count of Nad Mullach held two fingers to his lips as he
entered, pulling the door closed behind him. “More quiet. The archive-
master is nattering about just up the hall.”
   “And why should I care?” the duke exclaimed, but not so loudly as the
first time. “Are we children, to hide from that leathery old eunuch?”
   “If you wanted a meeting that all know about,” Eolair asked, settling
himself on a stool, “then why are we hiding in a closet?”
   “It’s no closet,” the Rimmersman grumbled, “and you know perfectly
well why I told you to come here, and why no secret is safe in the Inner
Keep. Where’s Escritor Velligis?”
   “He felt that a closet was no place for the lector’s right-hand man.”
Eolair laughed. Isgrimnur did not. He thought the Hernystirman drunk by
his flushed face, or at least a little so. He wished he were the same.
   “I thought it important that we meet somewhere we could talk freely,”
Isgrimnur said, a little defensively. “We have been much seen in deep
conversation lately.”
   “No, Isgrimnur, it’s you that’s right.” Eolair waved a hand reassuringly.
He was dressed for the Lady Day celebrations, playing the part of respectful
outsider—a part which the pagan Hernystiri had learned well. His festival
tunic of white was belted three times, each belt covered in gold or enameled
metals, and his long mane of black hair was pulled back behind his head
and tied with golden ribbon. “I was only making a joke, and a sad joke it
is,” he resumed, “when King John’s loyal subjects must meet in secret to
speak of things which are no treason.”
   Isgrimnur moved slowly to the door and juggled the latch, making sure it
had closed. He turned, putting his wide back against the wood, and crossed
his arms across his substantial chest. He, too, was dressed for the festivities
in a fine, light-weight blue tunic and hose, but the braids of his beard had
already been frayed loose by nervous tugging, and the hose bagged at the
knee. Isgrimnur hated dressing up.
   “Well,” he growled at last, tilting his head defiantly, “should I speak first,
or will you?”
   “There is no need to worry who will speak first,” the count said.
   For a moment the flush of Eolair’s face, the color on his high, thin
cheekbones, reminded the older man of something he had seen once, years
ago; a haunting figure glimpsed across fifty yards of Rimmersgard snow.
   One of the ‘white foxes,’ my father called that one.
   Isgrimnur wondered if the old stories were true—was there really Sithi
blood in the Hernystiri noble houses?
   Eolair ran a hand across his forehead as he continued speaking, blotting
away the tiny droplets of sweat, and the momentary likeness was gone. “We
have spoken enough to know that things have gone fiercely wrong. What
we need to speak on—and what we need privacy to speak on,” he waved his
hand at the cluttered archive room, a dark nest of paper and parchment lit
by a high triangular window, “—is what we can do about it. If anything. But
that is it: What can be done?”
   Isgrimnur was not yet willing to jump so boldly into talk that, whatever
Eolair might say, had already the faint, sickening tang of treason.
   “It’s this way,” he said. “I would be the last to hold Elias to blame for
this bedamned weather. I should know: while it’s hot as the Devil’s breath
and dry as a bone here, in my land in the north we’re having a terrible
winter: snows and ice that beat anything remembered. So weather here is no
fault of the king’s, any more than the roofs collapsed and the cattle frozen in
the barn halls in Rimmersgard are mine.” He tugged fiercely, and another
beard-braid raveled loose, the ribbon hanging limply down from the gray
tangle. “Of course, Elias is to blame for keeping me here while my kinsfolk
and people suffer, but that is another line and another hook. . . .
    “No, it’s that the man doesn’t seem to care! The wells drying up, the
farms lying fallow, starving people sleeping in the fields and cities a-choke
with the plague—and he seems not to notice. The taxes and levies go up,
those bedamned arse-licking pups of the nobility he has befriended ring him
’round all day drinking and singing and fighting and . . . and . . .” The old
duke grunted in disgust. “And the tournaments! Udun’s red spear, I was as
much for the tourney as any man in my day, but Erkynland is crumbling to
dust beneath his father’s throne, the countries of the High Ward are restless
as a spooked colt—and still the tournaments go on! And the barge parties
on the Kynslagh! And the jugglers, and the tumblers, and the bearbaitings!
It’s as bad as what they say of the worst days of Crexis the Goat!” Red in
the face himself now, Isgrimnur balled his fists and stared at the floor.
    “In Hernystir,”—Eolair’s voice was soft and musical after the
Rimmersman’s hoarse tirade—“we say: ‘A shepherd, not a butcher,’
meaning a king should preserve his land and people like a flock, taking
from them only what he needs to get by—not use them up until there’s
nothing left to do but eat what remains.” Eolair stared at the small window
and the particles of parchment dust that eddied in its diffuse light. “That’s
what Elias is doing: eating his land bite by bite, as surely as did the giant
Croich-ma-Feareg once devoured the mountain at Crannhyr.”
    “He was a good man once, Elias was,” Isgrimnur said wonderingly, “—
far easier to deal with than his brother. Surely, not all men are meant for
kingship, but it seems more is wrong than just a man made ill by power.
Something is damnably wrong—and it is not only Fengbald and Breyugar
and those that are leading him to the cliff.” The duke had somewhat
regained his breath. “You know it is that vicious bastard Pryrates who fills
his head with strange notions, and keeps him up nights in that tower with
lights and unholy noises, until sometimes it seems that the king does not
know where he is when the sun is up. What could Elias want from such a
creature as that whoreson priest? He is king of the known world—what
could Pryrates possibly have to offer him?”
    Eolair stood, still with eyes fixed to the light above, and dampened his
sleeve against his forehead. “I wish I knew,” he said at last. “So. What then
is there to do?”
    Isgrimnur narrowed his old, fierce eyes. “What said Escritor Velligis? It
is, after all, Mother Church’s cathedral that is confiscate at Saint Sutrin’s. It
is Duke Leobardis’ Nabbanai ships, along with your King Lluth’s, that
Guthwulf has stolen under the lie of ‘plague danger’ at the sovereign harbor
of Abaingeat. Leobardis and Lector Ranessin are close; they rule Nabban
like one two-headed monarch. Surely Velligis must have had something to
say on his master’s behalf.”
   “He has much to say, but little of substance, my friend.” Eolair slumped
back on his stool. The bright shaft of sunlight was diminished now, its
source partially blocked as the sun sank, the little room in even denser
shadow. “Of what Duke Leobardis thinks of this act of piracy—three grain
ships thieved outright in a Hernystir harbor—Velligis professes not to know.
On his master’s behalf he is, as ever, vague. His Sacredness Ranessin, I
think, has designs to be a peacemaker between Elias and Duke Leobardis,
and perhaps at the same time improve the position of your Aedonite Church
here at court. My master King Lluth has directed me next to travel to
Nabban, and perhaps I will find out the truth of that when I am there. I fear,
however, that if such is the case, the lector has misjudged: if the snubbing
that Elias and his sycophants have given Velligis is any indication, the King
is more restless even than his father was under Mother Church’s broad
shadow.”
   “So many plots!” Isgrimnur groaned. “So many intrigues! It makes my
head swim. I am not a man for such things. Give me a sword or an axe and
let me deal blows!”
   “Is that why you have taken to closets?” Eolair smiled, and produced
from beneath his cloak a skin of sour-honey mead. “There does not seem
anyone to swing at here. I think you are taking rather well to intrigue late in
life, my good Duke.”
   Isgrimnur frowned, and took the offered skin. He’s a born intriguer
himself, our Eolair, he thought. I should be grateful, if nothing else, to have
someone to talk to. For all that Hernystiri poetry-talk I’ve heard him trot
out for the ladies, he’s hard as shield-steel underneath—a good ally for
treacherous times.
   “There’s something else.” Isgrimnur handed the skin back to Eolair and
wiped his mouth. The count took a long swallow and then nodded his head.
   “Out with it. I’m all ears like a Circoille hare.”
   “That dead man old Morgenes found out in the Kynswood?” Isgrimnur
said, “—the arrowshot one?” Eolair nodded again. “He was mine.
Bindesekk by name, although by the time he was discovered I would never
have known him but for a broken bone in his face that was got in an earlier
service for me. Of course I said nothing.”
   “Yours?” Eolair cocked an eyebrow. “And doing what? Do you know?”
   Isgrimnur laughed, a short, barking sound. “Certainly. That is why I kept
quiet. I sent him out when Skali of Kaldskryke took his kinsmen and
departed north. Sharp-nose has been making too many new friends among
Elias’ court for my liking, so I sent Bindesekk out with a message to my
son Isorn. As long as Elias is keeping me here with these ridiculous errands,
these shows of mock-diplomacy that he claims are so important—and if
they were so important, why entrust them to a blunt old war-dog like me?—
then I wanted Isorn to be on especial close watch. I don’t trust Skali any
more than I would a starving wolf, and my son has troubles enough at home
already, from what I hear. All the reports that have trickled down across the
Frostmarch are bad—raging storms in the north, the roads unsafe, villagers
forced to huddle together in the main halls. It makes for troubled times, and
Skali knows that.”
   “Do you think, then, it was Skali killed your man?” Eolair leaned
forward, passing the skin back.
   “I don’t know, to be sure.” The duke tipped back his head for another
long swallow, the muscles in his thick neck pulsing; a thin drizzle of mead
spattered down his blue tunic. “What I mean is: it’s the most obvious thing,
but I have many doubts.” He wiped at the stain absently for a moment.
“First of all, even if he caught Bindesekk, it’s an act of treason to kill him.
For all his contempt, Skali is my liege-man and I am his liege-lord.”
   “But the body was hidden.”
   “Not well. And why so close to the castle? Why not wait until they had
reached the Wealdhelm Hills—or the Frostmarch Road if it’s even passable
—and kill him there, where I’d never find out? Also, the arrow doesn’t
strike me as Skali’s way. I could see him chopping Bindesekk up in a rage
with that great axe of his, but shooting him and then dropping him in the
Kynswood? It doesn’t sit right, somehow.”
   “Then who?”
   Isgrimnur shook his head, feeling the mead at last. “That’s what worries
me, Hernystirman,” he said at last. “I just don’t know. There are strange
things afoot. Travelers’ tales, castle rumors . . .”
   Eolair went to the door and unlatched it, pushing it open to allow fresh
air into the small room.
   “These are indeed strange times, my friend,” he said, and took a deep
breath. “And, perhaps the most important question of all—where in this
strange world is Prince Josua?”




   Simon picked up a small piece of flint and sent it spinning into space.
After describing a graceful arc through the morning air the stone descended
with a muffled snap into a leafless topiary animal in the garden below.
Crawling to the edge of the chapel roof, Simon marked its impact point like
a skilled catapult man, noting the quiver at the haunches of the hedge-
squirrel. He rolled back from the roof gutter and into the shadow of a
chimney, savoring the cool solidity of the stones beneath his spine.
Overhead the fierce eye of the Marris sun glared down, nearing its noon
apex.
   It was a day to evade responsibility, to escape Rachel’s chores and
Morgenes’ explanations. The doctor had not yet found out—or had not
mentioned—Simon’s thwarted foray into the military arts, and Simon was
content to keep it that way.
   Spread-eagled and squint-eyed in the morning brightness, he heard a
faint ticking noise near his head. He opened one eye in time to see a tiny
gray shadow whisk past. Rolling slowly over onto his stomach, he scanned
the rooftop.
   The great chapel roof spread before him, a field of humped and irregular
slate tiles in whose cracks sprouted tight-coiled hanks of brown and pale
green moss that had somehow miraculously survived the drought, clinging
to life as grudgingly as they clung to the splintered tiles. The plain of slates
marched uphill from the guttered edge to the chapel’s dome, which pushed
up through the roof like a sea turtle’s shell breaching the shallow wavelets
of a quiet cove. Seen from this angle the dome’s colorful glass panels—
which shone inside the chapel with magical pictures of the lives of saints—
looked dark and flat, a parade of crude figures across a dun-colored world.
At the dome’s apex an iron knob held aloft a golden Tree, but from Simon’s
viewpoint it was merely gilded, the gold leaf peeling in slender, shimmering
strips that revealed the corrosion beneath.
   Beyond the castle chapel the sea of roofs spread out in all directions: the
Great Hall, the throne room, the archives and servant’s quarters, all pitched
and uneven, repaired or replaced many times as the seasons in their passing
licked at gray stone and lead shingle, then nibbled them away. To Simon’s
left loomed the slender white arrogance of Green Angel Tower; farther
back, protruding above the arch of the chapel dome, the gray, squat bulk of
Hjeldin’s Tower sat up like a begging dog.
   As Simon surveyed the expanse of the roof-world, a flirt of gray
appeared again at the edge of his vision. Turning swiftly, he saw the
hindquarters of a small soot-colored cat disappear into a hole at the roofs
edge. He crawled across the slates to investigate. When he was close
enough to observe the hole, he dropped back down onto his stomach,
balancing his chin onto the back of his hands. There was no sign of
movement now.
   A cat on the roof, he thought. Well, someone might as well live up here
besides flies and pigeons—I suppose he eats those scrabbling roof rats.
   Simon, despite having seen only its tail and back legs thus far, felt a
sudden affinity with this outlaw roof cat. Like him, the cat knew the secret
passages, the angles and crannies, and went where it would without leave.
Like himself, this gray hunter made its way without the concern or charity
of others. . . .
   Even Simon knew that this was a terrible exaggeration of his own
situation, but he rather liked the comparison.
   For example, hadn’t he crept unsuspected onto this same rooftop four
days ago, the day after Elysiamansa, to watch the mustering out of the
Erkynguard? Rachel the Dragon, irritated by his infatuation with everything
except maintenance of the household, which she felt was his true—and
neglected—duty, had earlier forbidden him to go down and join the crowd
at the main gate.
   Ruben the Bear, the hump-shouldered, slab-muscled master of the castle
smithy, had told Simon that the Erkynguard was going to Falshire, up the
River Ymstrecca to the east of Erchester. The wool merchant’s guild there
was causing trouble, Ruben had explained to the youth as he dropped a red-
hot horseshoe into a bucket of water. Waving away the hissing steam,
Ruben had then tried to describe the complicated situation: it seemed that
the drought had caused such distress that the sheep of Falshire’s farmers—
their main livelihood—must now be appropriated by the crown to feed the
starving, dispossessed masses crowding into Erchester. The wool
merchants, crying that this would ruin them—that they, too, would be made
to starve—were swarming in the streets, inflaming the local folk against the
unpopular edict.
   So Simon had climbed secretly onto the chapel roof Tiasday-last to
watch the Erkynguard ride out, several hundred well-armed foot soldiers
and a dozen knights under the command of Earl Fengbald, whose fief
Falshire was. As Fengbald rode out at the front of the Guard, helmed and
corseleted, splendid in his red tunic and silver-stitched eagle, several of the
more cynical in the watching crowd suggested the Earl was taking so many
soldiers for fear that his Falshire subjects would not recognize him, owing
to his extended absences. Others suggested he might fear that they would
recognize him—Fengbald had not exactly been tireless in the interests of
his hereditary domain.

                                     •••

   Simon thought back warmly on Fengbald’s impressive helmet, a
gleaming silver casque crested with a pair of spreading wings.
   Rachel and the others are right, he thought suddenly. Here I am
daydreaming again. Fengbald and his noble friends will never know if I live
or die. I must make something of myself. I don’t want to be a child forever,
do I? He scratched at a slate tile with a piece of gravel, trying to draw an
eagle. Besides, I would probably look foolish in armor . . . wouldn’t I?
   The memory of the soldiers of the Erkynguard marching so proudly out
the great Nearulagh Gate touched him in sore spots, but it warmed him, too;
he kicked his feet lazily as he watched the cat’s cave for sign of its denizen.

                                     •••

   It was an hour past noon before a suspicious nose appeared at the front of
the hole. By this time Simon was riding a stallion through the gates of
Falshire, flowers raining down from the windows above. Tugged back to
attention by the sudden movement, he held his breath as the nose was
followed by the rest of the beast: a small, short-furred gray cat with a patch
of white running from right eye to chin. The youth stayed stock-still as the
cat—a mere half a fathom from his own position—took momentary fright at
something and arched its back, eyes narrowing. Simon feared it had seen
him, but as he remained motionless it suddenly moved forward, bounding
out of the shadow of the roofs upcurved edge and into the broad path of the
sun’s passage. As Simon watched, delighted, the gray catling found a loose
piece of flint and batted it skittering across the tiles, following to hook it
with an agile paw and begin the game anew.
   He watched the roof cat’s antics for some time, until a particularly
ridiculous pratfall—the catling had skidded to a stop with both front paws
on the slate chip, tumbled head over heels into a crack between the tiles,
then lay there with its tail wriggling in exasperation—forced him to reveal
his position. His long-suppressed snort of laughter broke forth; the little
beast leaped tumbling into the air, landed, and bolted for its hole with no
more than a brief glance in Simon’s direction. This scrambling exit
convulsed him again.
   “Scatter, cat!” he called after the vanished creature. “Scatter, you catter!
Scatter-scatter!”
   As he was crawling toward the hole-mouth to sing a little song of shared
outlook on roofs and stones and solitude to the gray cat—who he was
somehow certain would be listening—something else caught his eye. He
put his hands on the roof edge and poked his head up to look. The
beginnings of a breeze traced subtle designs through his hair.
   Away to the southeast, far beyond the limits of Erchester and the
headlands above the Kynslagh, a deep gray mark was smeared across the
clear Marris sky, as if a dirty thumb had been dragged across a newly-
painted wall. The wind shredded the dark smudge even as he watched, but
darker billows were rising from below, a turbulent darkness too thick for
any wind to diffuse. A regular black cloud was mounting upward on the
eastern horizon.
   It took him a long, puzzled moment before he realized that what he was
seeing was smoke, a dense plume of it besmirching the pale, clean sky.
   Falshire was burning.