
                           King Hemlock




Two days later, on the morning of Marris’ last day, Simon was going
down to breakfast with the other scullions when he was brought up short by
a heavy black hand on his shoulder. For an unreal, terrifying moment his
thoughts skipped back to his throne room dream, and the ponderous
dancing of the malachite kings.
   This hand, though, proved to be wearing a cracked, fingerless black
glove. Neither was its owner made of dark stone—although as Simon stared
up in surprise at the face of Inch, it did seem that God had somehow
neglected to provide enough living stuff while this Inch-person was being
made, and that last-minute substitutions of some inert, imperturbable matter
had been necessary.
   Inch leaned down until his whiskered face was very close to Simon’s;
even his breath seemed to smell more of stone than of wine or onions or
anything ordinary.
   “Doctor wants to see you.” He rolled his eyes from side to side. “Right
away, like.”
   The other scullions had scattered past Simon and the hulking Inch with
curious looks and continued on their way. Simon, trying to squirm out from
underneath the weighty hand, watched them go despairingly.
   “Very well. I’ll be right there,” he said, and with a wiggle tugged free.
“Just let me get a crust of bread that I can eat as I go.” He trotted on down
the corridor toward the servants’ eating room, stealing a backward glance;
Inch was still standing in the same place, following his retreat with the
tranquil eyes of a bull in a meadow.

                                     •••

   When he emerged in a short while with a heel of bread and a wedge of
chewy white cheese, he was dismayed to find that Inch had waited for him.
The large man fell into step alongside as he headed toward Morgenes’
chambers. Simon offered him some food, trying to smile as he did so, but
Inch only stared at it incuriously and said nothing.
   As they walked across the dry-rutted open ground of the Middle Bailey,
threading through the flocks of writing-priests making their daily
pilgrimages between the Chancelry and the Hall of Archives, Inch cleared
his throat as if to speak. Simon, who felt so uncomfortable around this
person that even silence made him nervous, looked up expectantly.
   “Why . . .” Inch at last began, “. . . why do you take my place?” He did
not turn his waxy eyes away from the priest-clogged pathway before them.
   It was Simon’s heart that now took on the qualities of stone: cold, heavy,
and burdensome. He was sorry for this farm animal that thought itself a
man, but frightened by him, too.
   “I . . . I haven’t taken your place.” His protestations sounded false even
to his own ears. “Doesn’t the doctor still have you in to help out with
carrying things, and setting things up? He is teaching me to do other things,
things that are very different.”
   They walked on in silence. At last Morgenes’ chambers were in view,
crouched in choking ivy like the nest of a small but resourceful beast. When
they were perhaps ten paces away, Inch’s hand clutched Simon’s shoulder
once more.
   “Before you came,” Inch said, his wide, round face moving down toward
Simon’s like a basket being lowered from an upstairs window, “. . . before
you came, I was his helper. I was going to be next.” He frowned, pushing
his lower lip out and knitting his single bar of eyebrow into a steeper angle,
but his eyes were still mild and sad. “Doctor Inch, I would have been.” He
focused his gaze on Simon, who half-feared he would be crumpled beneath
the weight of the paw on his collarbone. “I don’t like you, little kitchen
boy.”
   Turning him loose, Inch shuffled away, the back of his head barely
visible above the mountainous rise of his bowed shoulders. Simon, rubbing
his neck, felt a little sick.

                                    •••

   Morgenes was ushering a trio of young priests out of his chambers. They
were conspicuously—and somewhat shockingly, as far as Simon was
concerned—drunk.
   “They came for my contribution to the All Fool’s Day celebration,”
Morgenes said as he shut the door behind the trio, who had already burst
into ragged song. “Hold this ladder, Simon.”
   A bucket of red paint was perched on the ladder’s topmost step, and
when the doctor reached it he fished out a brush that had fallen in and began
daubing strange characters above the doorframe—angular symbols, each
one a tiny, puzzling picture. They looked to Simon a little like the ancient
writings contained in some of Morgenes’ books.
   “What are those for?” he asked. The furiously painting doctor did not
reply. Simon took his hand off the rung to scratch his ankle and the ladder
began to sway ominously. Morgenes had to grasp the door lintel to keep
from toppling.
   “No, no, no!” he barked, trying to keep the ebb and flow of the paint
from overtopping the bucket’s edge. “You know better, Simon. The rule is:
all questions written out! But wait until I’m down from here—if I fall off
and die, there’ll be no one to answer you.” Morgenes went back to his
painting, sputtering quietly to himself.
   “Sorry, Doctor,” Simon said, a touch indignantly, “I just forgot.”
   A few moments passed with no other sounds than the whiskery swish of
Morgenes’ brush.
   “Will I always have to write down my questions? I can’t hope to write as
fast as I think up things I want to know about.”
   “That,” said Morgenes, squinting at his last stroke, “was the general idea
behind the rule. You, boy, devise questions like God makes flies and poor
people—in droves. I am an old man, and prefer to set my own pace.”
   “But,” Simon’s voice took on a despairing tone, “I shall be writing the
rest of my days!”
   “I can think of many less worthwhile ways you might spend your life,”
Morgenes responded, beetling down the ladder. He turned to survey the
complete effect, the arch of strange letters all along the top of the door
frame. “For instance,” he said, casting a sharp, knowing eye over to Simon,
“you might forge a letter and join Breyugar’s guardsmen, then spend your
time having little bits of you hacked off by men with swords.”
   Curses, thought Simon, caught like a rat.
   “So you . . . heard, did you?” he asked at last. The doctor nodded,
retaining his tight, angry smile.
   Usires save me, but he has such eyes! Simon thought. Like needles. He
has a stare worse than Rachel’s dragon-voice.
   The doctor continued to watch him. Simon’s gaze dropped to the floor.
At last, in a sullen voice that sounded years younger than he would have
preferred, Simon said it.
   “I’m sorry.”
   Now the doctor, as if a restraining cord had been cut, began to pace. “If
I’d had any idea of what you were going to use that letter for . . .” he fumed.
“What were you thinking of? And why, why did you feel you had to lie to
me!?”
   Somewhere deep inside, a part of Simon was pleased to see the doctor
upset—a part that enjoyed the attention. Another part, however, felt
ashamed. Somewhere else inside him—how many Simons were there?—
was a calm, interested observer who waited to see which part would speak
for all.
   Morgenes’ pacing was beginning to make him nervous. “Besides,” he
called to the old man, “why should you care? It’s my life, isn’t it? A kitchen
boy’s stupid life! They didn’t want me, anyway . . .” he finished in a mutter.
   “And you should be grateful!” Morgenes said sharply. “Grateful that they
don’t want you. What kind of life is it? Sitting around the barracks playing
dice with know-nothing louts during time of peace; getting hacked, arrow-
pierced and stallion-stamped in time of war. You don’t know, you stupid
boy—to be a simple kern while all of these high-living, peasant-cudgeling
knights are on the battlefield is no better than being a shuttlecock at the
Lady’s Day games.” He whirled to face Simon. “Do you know what
Fengbald and his knights did at Falshire?”
   The youth did not answer.
   “They put the entire wool district to the torch, that’s what they did.
Burned women and children along with the rest—just because they didn’t
want to give up their sheep. Fengbald had the sheep-dipping vats filled with
hot oil and scalded the leaders of the wool merchants’ guild to death. Six
hundred of Earl Fengbald’s own subjects slaughtered, and he and his men
marched back to the castle singing! And this is the company you wish to
join!?”
   Simon was truly angry, now. He felt his face getting hot, and was
terrified that he might burst into tears. The dispassionate observer-Simon
had disappeared entirely. “So?” he shouted. “What does it matter to
anyone!?” Morgenes’ apparent surprise at this unusual outburst made him
feel worse. “What is to become of me?” he asked, and slapped at his thighs
in frustration. “There is no glory in the scullery, no glory among the
chambermaids . . . and no glory here in a dark room filled with stupid . . .
books!”
   The hurt look on the old man’s face burst the straining dikes at last;
Simon fled in tears to the far part of the doctor’s chamber to huddle sobbing
on the sea-chest, his face pressed against the cold stone wall. Outside,
somewhere, the three young priests were singing hymns in distracted,
drunken harmony.
   The little doctor was at his side in a moment, patting with an awkward
hand at the youth’s shoulder.
   “Now, boy, now . . .” he said bewilderedly, “what is all this talk of glory?
Have you caught the sickness, too? Curse me for a blind beggar, I should
have seen. This fever has cankered even your simple heart, hasn’t it,
Simon? I’m sorry. It takes a strong will or practiced eye to see through the
glitter to the rotten core.” He patted Simon’s arm again.
   Simon had no idea what the doctor was talking about, but the tone of
Morgenes’ voice was soothing. Despite himself, he felt his anger begin to
slip away—but the feeling of what seemed like weakness that followed
made him sit up and shake off the doctor’s hand. He wiped his wet face
roughly with his jerkin sleeve.
   “I don’t know why you’re sorry, Doctor,” he began, trying to keep his
voice from shaking. “I am sorry . . . for acting like a child.” He stood up,
and the little man’s eyes followed him as he crossed the room to the long
table, where he stood drawing a finger across a scatter of open books. “I
have lied to you, and I have made a fool of myself,” he said, not looking up.
“Please forgive the stupidity of a kitchen boy, Doctor . . . a kitchen boy who
thought he could be more than that.”
   In the silence that followed this brave speech, Simon heard Morgenes
make a strange sound—was he actually crying? But a moment later it
became all too clear: Morgenes was chuckling—no, laughing, trying to
muffle it behind his billowing sleeve.
   Simon whirled, ears burning like coals. Morgenes caught his eye for a
moment, then looked away, shoulders heaving.
   “Oh, lad . . . oh, lad,” he wheezed at last, putting a restraining hand out
toward the outraged Simon, “don’t go! Don’t be angry. You would be
wasted on the field of battle! You should be a great lord, and win the
victories at treaty-table that always outweigh victories of the field—or an
escritor of the Church, and wheedle the eternal souls of the rich and
dissolute.” Morgenes snickered again, and chewed on his beard until the fit
passed. Simon stood stone-still, face a-frown, unsure if he was being paid
compliment or insult. Finally the doctor regained his composure; he vaulted
to his feet and made his way to the ale butt. A long swallow completed the
calming procedure, and he turned to the youth with a smile.
   “Ah, Simon, bless you! Don’t let the clanking and boasting of King
Elias’ goodfellows and bravos impress you so much. You have a keen wit—
well, sometimes, anyway—and you have gifts you know nothing about yet.
Learn what you can from me, young hawk, and those others you find who
can also teach you. Who knows what your fate will be? There are many
kinds of glory.” He upended the butt for another frothy mouthful.
   After a moment’s careful inspection of Morgenes, to make sure that the
last speech was not just another tease, Simon at last permitted himself a shy
grin. He liked being called “young hawk.”
   “Very well, then. And I am sorry that I told you a lie. But if I have keen
wit, why will you not show me anything important?”
   “Like what?” Morgenes asked, his smile fading.
   “Oh, I don’t know. Magic . . . or something.”
   “Magic!” Morgenes hissed. “Is that all you think about, boy? Do you
think I am some hedge-wizard, some cheap-cloth court conjuror, that I
should show you tricks?” Simon said nothing. “I am still angry with you for
lying to me,” the doctor added. “Why should I reward you?”
   “I will do any chores you want, at any hour,” Simon said. “I’ll even wash
the ceiling.”
   “Here now,” Morgenes responded, “I will not be bullied. I tell you what,
boy: leave off this endless fascination with magic and I will answer all your
other questions for a month entire, and you shall not have to write down a
one! How’s that, hey?”
   Simon squinted, but said nothing.
   “Well then, I shall let you read my manuscript on the life of Prester
John!” the doctor offered. “I remember you asked about that once or twice.”
   Simon squinted harder. “If you’ll teach me magic,” he suggested, “I’ll
bring you one of Judith’s pies every week, and a barrel of Stanshire Dark
from the larder.”
   “There now!” Morgenes barked triumphantly. “See?! Do you see, boy?
So convinced are you that magical tricks will bring you power and good
luck that you are quite willing to steal to bribe me into teaching you! No,
Simon, I cannot make bargains with you over this.”
   Simon was angry again, but took a deep breath and pinched his arm.
“Why are you so set against it, Doctor?” he asked when he felt calmer.
“Because I am a scullion?”
   Morgenes smiled. “Even if you still labor in the scullery, Simon-lad, you
are no scullion. You are my apprentice. No, there is no deficiency in you—
except for your age and immaturity. You simply do not comprehend what
you are asking.”
   Simon slumped onto a stool. “I don’t understand,” he murmured.
   “Exactly.” Morgenes downed another gulp of ale. “What you call
‘magic’ is really only the action of things of nature, elemental forces much
like fire and wind. They respond to natural laws-but those laws are very
hard to learn and understand. Many may never be understood.”
   “But why don’t you teach me the laws!?”
   “For the same reason I wouldn’t give a burning torch to an infant sitting
on a pile of straw. The infant—and no insult is meant, Simon—is not
prepared for the responsibility. Only those who have studied many years in
many other subjects and disciplines can begin to master the Art that
fascinates you so. Even then they are not necessarily fit to wield any
power.” The old man drank again, wiped his lips and smiled. “By the time
most of us are capable of using the Art, we are old enough to know better. It
is too dangerous for the young, Simon.”
    “But . . .”
    “If you say: ‘But Pryrates . . .’ I shall kick you,” Morgenes said. “I told
you once, he is a madman—or as good as. He sees only the power to be
gained from wielding the Art, and ignores the consequences. Ask me about
the consequences, Simon.”
    He asked dully: “What about the con . . .”
    “You cannot exert force without paying for it, Simon. If you steal a pie,
someone else goes hungry. If you ride a horse too fast, the horse dies. If you
use the Art to open doors, Simon, you have little choice of houseguests.”
    Simon, disappointed, glared around the dusty room. “Why do you have
those signs painted over your door, Doctor?” he asked at last.
    “So no one else’s houseguests come a-visiting me.” Morgenes stooped to
put his flagon down, and as he did so something gold and shining fell out of
the collar of his gray robe, tumbling down to dangle swinging on its chain.
The doctor seemed not to notice. “I should send you back, now. But
remember this lesson, Simon, one fit for kings . . . or the sons of kings.
Nothing is without cost. There is a price to all power, and it is not always
obvious. Promise me you will remember that.”
    “I promise, doctor.” Simon, feeling the effects of the earlier crying and
shouting, was as lightheaded as if he had run a race. “What is that thing?”
he asked, bending forward to watch the golden object pendulum back and
forth. Morgenes held it out on his palm, giving Simon a brief look.
    “It’s a feather,” the doctor said shortly. As he dropped the gleaming thing
back into his robe, Simon saw that the quill end of the golden feather was
attached to a writing scroll carved of pearly white stone.
    “No, it’s a pen,” he said wonderingly, “—a quill pen, isn’t it?”
    “Very well, it’s a pen.” Morgenes growled. “Now if you have nothing
better to do than interrogate me about my personal ornaments, be off with
you! And don’t forget your promise! Remember!”

                                     •••

  Wandering back to the servant’s quarters across the hedged courtyard
gardens, Simon wondered at the events of a strange morning. The doctor
had found out about the letter, but didn’t punish him, or throw him out,
never to return. However, he had also refused to teach Simon anything
about magic. And why had his assertion about the quill-pendant irritated the
old man so?
   Pondering, plucking absently at the dry, unbudded rosebushes, Simon
pricked his finger on a hidden thorn. Cursing, he held up his hand. The
bright blood was a red bead on his fingertip, a single crimson pearl. He
stuck his finger in his mouth and tasted salt.




   In the darkest part of the night, on the very cusp of All Fool’s Day, a
tremendous crash reverberated through the Hayholt. It rattled sleepers
awake in their beds and drew a long, sympathetic hum from the dark bell
clusters in Green Angel Tower.
   Some of the young priests, gleefully ignoring midnight prayers on this,
their once-yearly night of freedom, were struck from their stools as they sat
swilling wine and insulting Bishop Domitis; the concussive force of the
blow was so great that even the drunkest felt a wave of terror run through
them, as though in a deep-sunken part of themselves they had known all
along that God would eventually make his displeasure felt.
   But when the ragged, startled crew milled out to the courtyard to see
what had happened, shaven acolyte heads like so many pale mushrooms in
the silky moonlight, there was no shape of the universal cataclysm they had
all expected. Except for a few faces of other recently-wakened castle-
dwellers peering curiously from the windows, the night was untroubled and
clear.

                                    •••

   Simon was dreaming in his spare, curtained bed, nested among the
treasures he had so carefully collected; in his dream he climbed a pillar of
black ice, every straining inch upward eroded by a nearly identical slip
backward. He clutched a parchment in his teeth, a message of some sort. At
the topmost point of the cold-burning pillar was a door; in the doorway a
dark presence crouched, waiting for him . . . waiting for the message.
   As he finally reached the threshold a hand snaked out, grasping the
parchment in an inky, vaporous fist. Simon tried to slide back, to fall away,
but another dark claw jabbed out from the doorway and caught his wrist. He
was drawn upward toward a pair of eyes, red-bright as paired crimson holes
in the belly of an infernal black oven. . . .
   As he woke gasping from sleep he heard the sullen voices of the bells,
moaning their displeasure as they descended back into cold, brooding sleep.

                                    •••

   Only one person in all the great castle claimed to have seen anything.
Caleb the horse-boy, Shem’s slow-witted assistant, had been terribly excited
and unable to sleep all night. The next morning he was to be crowned King
of Fools, and carried on the shoulders of the young priests as they marched
through the castle singing bawdy songs and tossing oats and flower petals.
They would take him to the refectory hall where he would preside over the
All Fool’s banquet from his mock throne built of Gleniwent river reeds.
   Caleb had heard the great roar, he told any who would listen, but he had
also heard words, a booming voice speaking a language that the stable boy
could only say was “bad.” He also seemed to think he had seen a great
snake of fire leap from the window of Hjeldin’s Tower, looping itself
around the spire in flaming coils and then splintering into a shower of
sparks.
   No one paid Caleb’s story much heed—there was a reason the simple-
minded boy had been chosen King of Fools. Also, the dawn brought
something to the Hayholt that eclipsed any thunder in the night, and even
the prospects of Fool’s Day.
   Daylight revealed a line of clouds—rain clouds—crouching on the
northern horizon like a flock of fat, gray sheep.
    “By Dror’s becrimsoned mallet, Udun’s one dread eye, and . . . and . . .
and our Lord Usires! Something must be done!”
    Duke Isgrimnur, nearly forgetting his Aedonite piety in his wrath,
brought his scarred, fur-knuckled fist down on the Great Table hard enough
to make the crockery jump six feet away. His broad body swayed like an
over-cargoed ship in a squall as he cast his eyes from one end of the table to
the other, then brought his fist down again. A goblet teetered briefly, then
surrendered to gravity.
    “Steps must be taken, sire!” he roared, and tugged angrily at his belt-
length whiskers. “The Frostmarch is in a state of bedamned anarchy! While
I sit here with my men like so many knots on a log, the Frostmarch Road
has become a byway for bandits! And I have had no word from Elvritshalla
for two months or more!” The duke blew out a great gust of air that made
his mustache flutter. “My son is in dread need, and I can do nothing! Where
is the High King’s ward of safety, my Lord?”
    Reddening like a beet the Rimmersman dropped back into his chair. Elias
raised a languid eyebrow and surveyed the other knights scattered about the
circumference of the table, far outnumbered by the empty chairs between
them. The torches in the wall sconces threw long wavering shadows onto
the high tapestries.
    “Well, now that the aged but honorable Duke has made himself known,
would anyone else like to join his suit?” Elias toyed with his own gold
goblet, scuffing it along the crescent-shaped scars in the oak. “Is there
anyone else who feels that the High King of Osten Ard has deserted his
subjects?” At the king’s right hand Guthwulf smirked.
    Isgrimnur, smarting, began to climb back to his feet, but Eolair of Nad
Mullach laid a restraining hand on the old duke’s arm.
    “Sire,” Eolair said, “neither Isgrimnur nor anyone else who has spoken is
accusing you of anything.” The Hernystirman placed his palms flat on the
table. “What we are all saying then, is that we are asking—entreating, my
lord—that you pay more heed to the problems of those of your subjects who
live outside your view here at the Hayholt.” Perhaps thinking his words too
harsh, Eolair summoned a smile onto his mobile face. “The problems, they
are there,” he continued. “Outlawry is everywhere in the north and west.
Starving men have few scruples, and the drought just ended has brought out
the worst . . . in everyone.”
   Elias, unspeaking, continued to stare at Eolair after the westerner had
finished. Isgrimnur couldn’t help noticing how pale the king looked. It
reminded the older man of the time in the southern islands that he had
nursed Elias’ father John through a bout of fever.
   That bright eye, he thought, that nose like a hunting bird. Odd how these
bits, these brief expressions and reminders, go on generation after
generation—long after the man and his works are dead.
   Isgrimnur thought of Miriamele, Elias’ pretty, melancholy child. He
wondered what baggage of her father’s she would carry on, what disparate
images of her beautiful haunted mother, dead ten years now—or was it
twelve?
   Across the table Elias shook his head slowly, as if waking from a dream
or trying to dispel the wine fumes from his head. Isgrimnur saw Pryrates,
seated at the king’s left side, quickly withdraw his pale hand from Elias’
sleeve. There was something abhorrent about the priest, Isgrimnur thought,
not for the first time, something far deeper than merely his hairlessness and
scratchy voice.
   “Well, Count Eolair,” the king said, an elusive smile briefly twitching on
his lips, “as long as we are speaking of ‘obligations’ and such, what does
your kinsman King Lluth have to say about the message I sent him?” He
leaned forward with apparent interest, his powerful hands folded on the
table.
   Eolair replied in measured tones, choosing his words with care. “As
always, Lord, he sends his respect and love to noble Erkynland. He does
feel, though, that he cannot afford to send more in the way of taxes . . .”
   “Tribute!” snorted Guthwulf, picking his nails with a slim poniard.
   “. . . In the way of taxes right now,” Eolair finished, ignoring the
interruption.
   “Is that so?” Elias asked, and smiled again.
   “Actually, my lord,” Eolair deliberately misread the smile’s import, “he
sent for me to ask you for royal help. You know the troubles the drought has
caused, and the plague. The Erkynguard must work with us to keep the
trade roads open.”
   “Oh, they must, must they?” King Elias’ eyes glinted, and a tiny throb
began between the strong cords of his neck. “It is ‘must’ now, is it?” He
leaned farther forward, shaking off Pryrates’ serpent-swift restraining hand.
“And who are you,” he growled, “the weanling stepcousin of a sheepherder-
king—who is only a king at all by my father’s weak-willed forebearance!—
who are you to tell me ‘must’!?”
   “My Lord!” cried old Fluiren of Nabban in horror, flapping his spotted
hands—mighty hands once, now bent and curled like a hawk’s feet. “My
Lord,” he panted, “your anger is kingly, but Hernystir is a trusted ally under
your father’s High Ward—not to mention his country was the birth-land of
your saintly mother, rest her soul! Please, sire, do not speak so of Lluth!”
   Elias swung his emerald gaze to Fluiren, and seemed about to focus his
wrath on that diminished hero, but Pryrates tugged the king’s dark sleeve
again and leaned close to mouth a few words in Elias’ ear. The king’s
expression softened, but the line of his jaw remained taut as a bowstring.
Even the air over the table seemed pulled tight, a grinding net of awful
possibility.
   “Forgive me for the unforgivable, Count Eolair,” Elias said at last, a
strange, stupid grin stretching the corners of his mouth wide. “Forgive me
my harsh, causeless words. It has been less than a month since the rains
began, and it was a difficult twelvemonth for us all before that.”
   Eolair nodded, his clever eyes uneasy. “Of course, Highness. I
understand. Please, you’ll grant me your pardon for provoking you.” Across
the oval table Fluiren folded his mottled hands with a satisfied nod.
   Isgrimnur now rose to his feet, ponderous as a brown bear climbing an
ice floe. “I, too, Sire, shall try to speak in a gentle fashion, though you all
know it is clean against my soldier’s nature.”
   Elias’ cheerful grimace remained. “Very good, Uncle Bear-skin—we will
all practice gentility together. What would you ask of your king?”
   The Duke of Elvritshalla took a deep breath, nervously finger-tangling
his beard. “Mine and Eolair’s people are in dire need, Lord. For the first
time since the earliest part of John Presbyter’s reign, the Frostmarch Road
has again become impassable—blizzards in the north, highway robbers
further south. The royal North Road past Wealdhelm is not much better. We
need these roads open, and kept so.” Isgrimnur leaned to the side and spat
on the floor. Fluiren winced. “Many of the clan-villages, according to my
son Isorn’s last letter, are suffering for lack of food. We cannot trade our
goods, we cannot keep contact with the more remote clans.”
    Guthwulf, carving at the table’s edge, yawned conspicuously. Heahferth
and Godwig, two younger barons wearing prominent green sashes, quietly
tittered.
    “Surely, Duke,” Guthwulf drawled, leaning back against the arm of his
chair like a sun-warmed cat, “you don’t blame us for that. Has our lord the
king powers like God Almighty—to stop the snows and storms with a wave
of his hand?”
    “I do not suggest that he should!” Isgrimnur rumbled.
    “Perhaps,” Pryrates said from the head of the table, his wide smile
strangely inappropriate, “you also blame the king for his brother’s
disappearance, as we have heard it rumored?”
    “Never!” Isgrimnur was genuinely shocked. Beside him Eolair narrowed
his eyes, as if seeing something unexpected. “Never!” the duke repeated,
looking helplessly at Elias.
    “Now, men, I know Isgrimnur would never think such a thing,” the king
said, waving a listless hand. “Why, old Uncle Bear-skin dandled both Josua
and myself on his knees. I hope, of course that Josua has suffered no harm
—the fact that he has not appeared at Naglimund in all this time is troubling
—but if anything foul is afoot it is not my conscience that will need
soothing.” But as he finished, for a moment Elias did look troubled, staring
at nothing as though he wandered through a confusing memory.
    “Let me get back to the point, Lord,” Isgrimnur said. “The northern roads
are not safe, and weather is not the only factor. My carls are spread too thin.
We need more men—strong men to make the Frostmarch safe again. The
marchland is aswarm with robbers and outlaws and . . . and worse things,
some say.”
    Pryrates leaned forward interestedly, chin perched on long-fingered
hands like a child watching rain through a window, sunken eyes catching
the torches’ gleam. “What ‘worse things,’ noble Isgrimnur?”
    “It’s not important. People think . . . things, that is all. You know how the
marchdwellers are . . .” The Rimmersman trailed off, taking an embarrassed
draft of his wine.
    Eolair rose. “If he will not voice his thoughts, what we have heard in the
markets and among the servants, I will. The northern people are afraid.
There are things going about that cannot be explained by deadly weather
and bad harvests. In my land we do not need to name things angels or
devils. We of Hernystir—we of the West—know that things walk upright on
this earth that are not men . . . and we know whether to fear them or not. We
Hernystiri knew the Sithi when they still lived in our fields, when the high
mountains and wide meadows of Erkynland were theirs.”
   The torches were guttering now, and Eolair’s high forehead and cheeks
seemed to shine with a faint scarlet radiance. “We have not forgotten,” he
said quietly. His voice carried even to half-sleeping Godwig, who lifted his
drunken head like a hound hearing a distant call. “We, the Hernystiri,
remember the days of the giants, and the days of the northern curse, the
White Foxes, so now we speak plainly: evil is abroad in this ill-omened
winter and spring. It is not only the bandits that prey on travelers, and who
cause the disappearance of isolated farmers. The people of the North are
afraid . . .”
   “‘We the Hernystiri’!” Pryrates’ mocking voice lanced out through the
silence, skewering the spell of otherworldliness. “‘We the Hernystiri’! Our
noble pagan friend claims to speak plainly!” Pryrates traced an exaggerated
Tree on the breast of his unpriestly red vestments. Elias’ expression turned
to sly good humor. “Very well!” the priest continued. “He has delivered us
the plainest pack of riddles and shadow-talk I have ever heard! Giants and
elves!” Pryrates flicked his hand, and his sleeve fluttered above the dinner
plates. “As if his majesty the king did not have enough to worry about—his
brother vanished, his subjects hungry and frightened—as if even the king’s
great heart was not near-to-breaking! And you, Eolair, you bring him pagan
ghost stories from the mouths of old wives!”
   “He be pagan, yes,” growled Isgrimnur, “but there be more Aedonite
good will in Eolair than in the pack of lazy pups I have seen lolling around
this court . . .”—Baron Heahferth barked, drawing drunken laughter from
Godwig—“lolling around while the people have been living on meager
hope and less harvest!”
   “It’s all right then, Isgrimnur,” said Eolair wearily.
   “My lords!” Fluiren flapped.
   “Well, I will not hear you insulted so for your honesty!” Isgrimnur
rumbled at Eolair. He lifted his fist to hammer the table again, then thought
better of it, bringing it instead to his breast where it enfolded the wooden
Tree hanging there. “Forgive my outburst, my king, but Count Eolair tells
the truth. Whether their fears have substance or no, the people do fear.”
    “And what do they fear, dear old Uncle Bear-skin?” asked the king as he
held his goblet for Guthwulf to refill.
    “They fear the dark,” the old man said, all dignity now. “They fear the
winter’s dark, and they fear the world will grow darker still.”
    Eolair turned his empty cup upside-down on the table. “In Erchester’s
market the few merchants who have been able to come south fill the
people’s ears with news of a strange vision. I have heard the same story so
many times that I do not doubt everyone in the town has heard it, too.”
Eolair paused and looked at the Rimmersman, who nodded once, gravely,
creasing the gray-shot beard.
    “Well?” said Elias impatiently.
    “In the Frostmarch wastes at night, a wonderful thing has been seen—a
cart, a black cart, drawn by white horses . . .”
    “How unusual!” Guthwulf sneered, but Pryrates and Elias locked eyes of
a sudden. The king raised an eyebrow as he rechanneled his gaze to the
westerner.
    “Go on.”
    “Those who have seen it say it appeared a few days after All Fool’s Day.
They say the cart bears a casket, and that black-robed monks walk behind
it.”
    “And to what heathen nature-sprite do the peasants attribute this vision?”
Elias leaned slowly backward in his chair, until he was looking down the
bridge of his nose at the Hernystirman.
    “They say, my king, that it is your father’s death-cart—begging your
pardon, sire—and that as long as the land suffers, he shall not sleep
peacefully in his barrow.”
    After an interval the king spoke, his voice barely louder than the hissing
of the torches.
    “Well, then,” he said, “we will have to make sure my father gets his well-
earned rest, will we not?”




  Look at them, old Towser thought as he dragged his bent leg and tired
body up the aisle of the throne room. Look at them, all lollying and
smirking—they look more like heathen chiefs of the Thrithings than
Aedonite knights of Erkynland.
   Elias’ courtiers hooted and called out as the jester limped by, wagging
their heads at him as though he were a Naraxi ape on a chain. Even the king
and the King’s Hand, Earl Guthwulf, whose chair was pulled up next to the
throne, contributed to the rough jests; Elias sat with a leg up on the arm of
the Dragonbone Chair like a farm lout on a gate. Only the king’s young
daughter Miriamele sat stiffly silent, pretty face solemn, shoulders pulled
back as if she were expecting a blow. Her honey-colored hair—which came
from neither her dark father nor raven-haired mother—hung down on either
side of her face like curtains.
   She looks like she’s trying to hide behind that hair, thought Towser. What
a shame. They say that the freckled darling is stubborn and forward, but all
I see in her eyes is fear. She deserves better, I suspect, than the swaggering
wolves who prowl our castles these days, but they say her father’s promised
her already to that be-damned drunken strutter Fengbald.
   He did not make swift progress, his path to the throne hindered by the
hands that reached out to pat or lightly slap at him. It was said to be good
luck to touch the head of a dwarf. Towser was not one, but he was old, very
old, and bent, it amused the courtiers to treat him as if he were.
   He reached Elias’ throne at last. The king’s eyes were red-rimmed with
too much drink or too little sleep, or—most likely—both.
   Elias turned his green gaze downward to the little man. “So, my dear
Towser,” he said, “you grace us with your company.” The jester noticed that
the buttons of the King’s white blouse were undone, and that there was a
gravy stain on the beautiful doeskin gloves tucked into his belt.
   “Yes, sire, I have come.” Towser assayed a bow, difficult with his stiff
leg; a sputter of mirth came from the lords and ladies.
   “Before you entertain us, oldest jester,” Elias said, swinging his leg down
off the throne arm and fixing the old man with his most sincere stare, “may
I perhaps beg of you a small favor? A question I have long wanted to ask?”
   “Of course, my king.”
   “Then tell me, Towser dear, however did you happen to be given a dog’s
name?” Elias raised his eyebrows in mock puzzlement, turning first to look
at Guthwulf, who grinned, and then to Miriamele, who looked away. The
rest of the courtiers laughed and whispered behind their hands.
   “I was not given a dog’s name, sire,” said Towser quietly. “I chose it for
myself.”
   “What!” said Elias, turning to the old man once more. “I don’t think that
I heard you properly.”
   “I gave myself a dog’s name, sire. Your noble father used to tease me for
being so faithful, because I would always go with him, would be at his side.
As a jest he named one of his hounds ‘Cruinh,’ the which was my given
name.” The old man turned slightly, so as to play to the crowd more fully.
“‘So then,’ quoth I, ‘if the dog be given my name by John’s will, then I
shall take the dog’s in turn.’ I have never answered since to any name but
Towser, and never shall.” Towser permitted himself a tiny smile. “It is
possible that your revered father regretted somewhat his joke thereafter.”
   Elias did not seem altogether pleased with this answer, but laughed
sharply anyway and slapped his knee. “A saucy dwarf, is he not?” he said,
looking around. The others assembled, trying to take the king’s mood,
laughed politely—all but Miriamele, who looked down on Towser from her
high-backed chair, her face caught in an intricate expression whose meaning
he could not unpuzzle.
   “Well,” said Elias, “If I were not the good king that I am—were I, say for
instance, a pagan king like Hernystir’s Lluth—I might have thy minuscule,
wrinkled head off for speaking so of my late father. But, of course, I am not
such a king.”
   “Of course not, sire,” Towser said.
   “Are you come to sing for us, then, or to tumble—we hope not, since you
appear over-frail for such antics—or what? Come, tell us.” Elias eased
himself back in his throne and clapped for more wine.
   “To sing, Majesty,” the jester replied. He took the lute from off his
shoulder and began to turn the pegs; bringing it into tune. As a young page
scurried over to fill the king’s cup, Towser looked up to the ceiling where
the banners of Osten Ard’s knights and nobles hung before the rain-
splashed upper windows. The dust was now gone and the cobwebs
dispersed, but to Towser the bright colors of the pennoncels seemed false—
too bright, like the painted skin of a drab who hopes to mimic her own
younger days, thus destroying what true beauty remains.
   As the nervous page finished filling the goblets of Guthwulf, Fengbald,
and the others, Elias waved his hand at Towser.
   “My lord,” he nodded, “I will sing of another good king—this one an
unfortunate and sad monarch, however.”
   “I do not like sad songs,” said Fengbald; he was, predictably, well into
his cups. Beside him, Guthwulf smirked.
   “Hush.” The King’s Hand made a show of elbowing his companion. “If
we do not like the tune when he has finished, then we can make the dwarf
hop.”
   Towser cleared his throat and strummed, singing then in his thin, sweet
voice:

              “Old King Juniper
              Mickle old was he
              Snowy-white his beard that hung
              From chin to bony knee.

              Noble old King Juniper
              Sitting on his throne
              Called: ‘Now bring my sons to me,
              For soon I will be gone.’

              They brought him then his princely sons
              They came with hounds and hawks
              The younger hight Prince Holly
              The older Prince Hemlock.

              ‘We have heard thy summons, sire,
              And left our hunt withal.’
              So Hemlock said, ‘What wouldst thou
              That thou biddest us to thy hall?

              ‘I soon must die, my princely sons,’
              The aged king he said.
              ‘And would see peace between thou twain
              When I at last am dead . . .’”
  “I do not think I like the sound of this song,” growled Guthwulf. “It has a
mocking tone.”
  Elias bade him be silent; his eyes gleamed as he signaled Towser to
continue.

               “But father dear, why dost thou fear?
               Prince Hemlock has the right.’
               Said Holly, ‘I could not counter him
               And be a Godly knight.’

               His mind thus eased, the King did bid
               His sons go out again
               And thanked merciful Aedon
               That they were such goodly men.

               But in the heart of Hemlock
               Who was the king-to-be
               Prince Holly’s words so gentle
               Sparked a fire of infamy.

               ‘That speaks so sweet a princely tongue
               Must wicked heart disguise.’
               Thought Hemlock, ’Gainst my crafty kin
               I must some scheme devise.’

               So fearing then the gentle heart
               That beat in Holly’s breast
               He took a draught of poison
               From out the lining of his vest.

               And when the brothers sate at meat
               He poured it in a cup
               And bade Prince Holly drink it down . . .”

   “Enough! This is treason!” roared Guthwulf as he leaped up, knocking
his chair back among the startled courtiers; his long sword hissed free of its
scabbard. Had Fengbald not sprung up in befuddlement, entangling his arm,
Guthwulf would have lunged at the quailing Towser.
   Elias, too, was quickly on his feet. “Sheathe that bodkin, you lackwit!”
he shouted. “No one draws sword in the king’s throne room!” He turned
from the snarling Earl of Utanyeat to the jester. The old man, having
recovered somewhat from the alarming spectacle of Guthwulf enraged,
struggled to put on dignity.
   “Do not think, dwarfish creature, that we are amused by your little song,”
the king snarled, “or that your long service for my father makes you
untouchable—but do not think either that you can prickle the royal skin
with such dull barbs. Get you out of my sight!”
   “I confess, sire, that the song was a new-minted one,” began the jester
shakily. His belled hat was askew. “But it was not . . .”
   “Get you hence!” Elias spat, all pale face and beast’s eyes. Towser
hobbled quickly out of the throne room, shuddering at the king’s last, wild
look, and the caged, hopeless face of his daughter, Princess Miriamele.