
                        Six Silver Sparrows




Simon stumbled across the commons yard, his thoughts shouting in his
head like a great crowd. He wanted to hide. He wanted to run away. He
wanted to bellow the terrible truth and laugh, to bring the castlefolk tripping
and tumbling out of doors. How sure they were, sure about everything,
guessing and gossiping—but they knew nothing! Nothing! Simon wanted to
howl and knock things over, but he could not free his heart from the spell of
fear cast by Pryrates’ carrion-bird eyes. What could be done? Who would
help to turn the world right side up again?
   Morgenes.
   Even as Simon ran shamble-jointed across the dusky commons, the
doctor’s calm, quizzical face appeared in his thoughts, pushing back the
priest’s deathly countenance and the chained shadow in the dungeon below.
Without another conscious thought he fled past the chained, black-painted
gate of Hjeldin’s Tower and up the stairs to the Chancelry. In mere moments
he was through the long hallways and pulling open the door to forbidden
Green Angel Tower. So violent was his need to reach the doctor’s chambers
that had Barnabas the sexton been waiting there to catch him, Simon might
have turned to quicksilver in the man’s hands. A great wind rushed through
him, filling him with wild haste, pushing him on. Before the tower’s side
door had swung shut behind him he was on the drawbridge; seconds later he
was pounding on Morgenes’ door. A pair of Erkynguardsmen look up
incuriously, then went back to their dice.
    “Doctor! Doctor! Doctor!” Simon shouted, banging away like a
demented cooper. The doctor quickly appeared, feet bare and eyes alarmed.
    “Horns of snorting Cryunnos, boy! Are you mad!? Have you eaten
bumblebees?!”
    Simon pushed past Morgenes without a word of explanation and headed
down the corridor. He stood panting before the inner door as the little man
came up behind. After a moment of shrewd inspection Morgenes let himself
and Simon in.
    No sooner had the door closed than Simon began the story of his
expedition and its results. The doctor fussed up a small fire and poured a jar
of spicy hippocras into a pan to warm. As he worked Morgenes listened,
carefully poking an occasional question into Simon’s tirade as a man might
reach a stick into a bear cage. He shook his head grimly, handing the youth
a cup of mulled wine, then sat down with his own cup in a scarred highback
chair. He had put slippers on his thin white feet; as he sat cross-legged on
the chair cushion, his gray robe rucked up above his bony shins.
    “. . . And I know I shouldn’t have touched a magic door, Doctor, I know
it, but I did—and it was Josua! I’m sorry, I’m getting things out of order,
but I’m sure I saw him! He had a beard, I think, and he looked terrible . . .
but it was him!”
    Morgenes sipped his wine and dabbed at his chin-whiskers with a long
sleeve. “I believe you, lad,” he said. “I wish that I didn’t, but it makes an
evil kind of sense. It confirms some strange information I received.”
    “But what will we do?!” Simon almost shouted. “He’s dying! Did Elias
do that to him? Does the king know?”
    “I really can’t say—it is certain, however, that Pryrates knows.” The
doctor put down his wine cup and stood. Behind his head the last of the
afternoon sun reddened the narrow windows. “As for what to do, the first
thing is for you to go and eat supper.”
    “Supper?!” Simon choked, spattering hippocras down his tunic. “With
Prince Josua . . . ?”
    “Yes, boy, that’s what I said. Supper. There’s nothing we can do right this
instant, and I need to think. If you miss your supper, it will just raise a hue
and cry—albeit a small one—and it will help to do just what we don’t want
to do: attract attention. No, go now and eat supper . . . and between bites,
keep your mouth shut, will you?”
                                    •••

   Mealtime seemed to pass as slowly as spring thaw. Wedged between
loudly chewing scullions, his heart beating double time, Simon resisted the
wild impulse to lash out and knock cups and crockery spinning to the rush-
strewn floor. The conversation infuriated him with its irrelevance, and the
shepherd’s pie that Judith had prepared especially for Belthainn Eve was as
tasteless and unchewable in his mouth as wood.
   Rachel watched his fidgeting with displeasure from her seat at the head
of the table. When Simon had sat still as long as he could and leaped up to
make his excuses, she followed him to the door.
   “I’m sorry, Rachel, I’m in a hurry!” he said, hoping to stave off the
lecture she seemed primed to deliver. “Doctor Morgenes has something
very important he wants me to help him with. Please?”
   For a moment the Dragon looked as though she were going to get that
fearful grip on his ear and bring him forcibly back to table, but something in
his face or tone caught at her; for a moment she almost smiled.
   “All right, boy, just this once—but you thank Judith for that nice bit of
pie before you go. She worked on it the whole afternoon.”
   Simon bolted over to Judith, pitched like a huge tent at her own table.
Her plump cheeks colored prettily while he praised her exertions. As he
hurried back to the door, Rachel leaned out and captured his sleeve. He
stopped and turned, mouth already open to complain, but Rachel only said:
“Now just calm yourself and be careful, you mooncalf boy. Nothing’s so
important that you should kill yourself getting there.” She patted his arm
and released him; he was through the door and gone as she watched.

                                    •••

   Simon had pulled on his vest and coat by the time he reached the well.
Morgenes had not yet arrived, so he paced impatiently in the deeper shadow
of the dining hall until a soft voice at his elbow made him start in surprise.
   “Sorry to make you wait, lad. Inch came by, and I had a devilish time
convincing him that I didn’t need him after all.” The doctor pulled his hood
forward, hiding his face.
    “How did you come up so quietly?” Simon asked, his whisper an
imitation of the doctor’s.
    “I can still get about a little, Simon,” the doctor said in an injured tone. “I
am old, but not yet moribund.”
    Simon did not know what “moribund” meant, but he caught the general
idea. “Sorry,” he whispered.
    The two made their way silently down the dining room stairs and into the
first storage room, where Morgenes produced a crystal sphere the size of a
green apple. When he rubbed it, a small spark flickered into being at the
center, gradually brightening until it limned the encircling casks and
bundles with soft honey-colored light. Morgenes shrouded the nether half of
it in his sleeve and held it before them as they paced carefully through the
stacked dry goods.
    The hatchway was closed; Simon did not remember whether or not he
had shut it himself in his mad dash out. They went down the ladder
carefully, Simon leading, Morgenes above him casting about this way and
that with the shining globe. Simon pointed out the closet where Pryrates had
almost captured him. They passed on, down to the bottom floor.
    The lowermost room was as untenanted as before, but the door leading to
the stone passageway was shut. Simon was almost positive that he had not
done this, and told Morgenes so, but the little man just waved his hand and
strode to the wall, finding the spot where the crack had been according to
Simon’s directions. The doctor rubbed his hand in a circular movement
across the wall, muttering something under his breath, but no crevice
appeared. After Morgenes had squatted by the wall talking to himself for
some time, Simon grew tired of bouncing from one foot to the other and
crouched down at the doctor’s side.
    “Can’t you just say some magic and make it open?”
    “No!” Morgenes hissed. “A wise man never, I repeat, never uses the Art
when he doesn’t need to—especially when dealing with another adept, like
our Father Pryrates. We might as well sign my name to it.”
    As Simon sat back on his heels and scowled, the doctor placed his left
hand flat in the middle of the area where the door had been; after a
moment’s light palpation of the surface he hit it smartly with the heel of his
right hand. The door popped open, pouring torchlight into the room. The
doctor peeked through, then dropped his lamp-crystal into the hem of his
voluminous sleeve and pulled out a stitched leather bag.
   “Ah, Simon-lad,” he chuckled quietly, “what a thief I would have made.
It was not a ‘magic door’—only hidden by use of the Art. Come on, now!”
They stepped through into the damp stone corridor.
   Their footfalls made syrupy echoes as they slipped and stepped down the
walkway to the corridor’s end and the locked door. After a moment’s
examination of the lock Morgenes stepped to the peephole and peered
inside.
   “I think you’re right, lad,” he hissed. “Nuanni’s Shinbone! But I wish
you weren’t.” He returned to the scrutiny of the lock. “Run up to the end of
the corridor and keep an ear open, won’t you?”
   As Simon stood guard, Morgenes fished around in his leather bag, at last
extracting a long, needle-thin blade set in a wooden handle. He waved it
merrily at Simon.
   “Naraxi pig-sticker. Knew it would come in useful one day!”
   He tested it against the keyhole; it slid into the aperture with room to
spare. He removed it and shook a tiny jar from his bag which he uncorked
with his teeth. As Simon watched, fascinated, Morgenes upended the jar
and poured a dark, sticky substance onto the needle blade, then quickly
poked the tip back into the keyhole; it left glistening traces as it passed into
the lock.
   Morgenes wiggled the pig-sticker for a moment, then stepped back and
counted on his fingers. When he had tallied both hands three times each, he
grasped the slender handle and twisted. He grimaced and let go.
   “Come here, Simon. We need your strong young arms.”
   At the doctor’s direction Simon grasped the strange tool by the butt end
and began to twist. For a moment his sweaty palms slipped on the polished
wood; he tightened his grip, and after a short interval felt something catch
inside the lock. An instant later he heard the bolt slide back. Morgenes
nodded his head, and Simon shouldered the door open.
   The smoldering rushes in the wall socket threw only faint light. As
Simon and the doctor approached they saw the shackled figure at the rear of
the cell look up, and his eyes widen slowly, as if in some kind of
recognition. His mouth worked, but only a scratchy huff of breath came out.
The smell of wet, foul straw was overwhelming.
   “Oh . . . oh . . . my poor Prince Josua . . .” Morgenes said. As the doctor
gave a quick inspection to Josua’s manacles, Simon could only look on,
feeling as helpless to affect the rush of events as if he dreamed. The prince
was achingly thin, and bearded like a roadside doomcrier; the parts of his
skin that showed through the miserable sacking were covered with red
sores.
   Morgenes was whispering in Josua Lackhand’s ear. He had again
produced his bag, and held in his hand a shallow pot, the sort that ladies
kept for their lip-paint. Briskly rubbing something from the pot on first one
palm, then the other, the little doctor once more looked over Josua’s
restraints. Both arms were shackled to a massive iron ring in the wall, one
manacled about the wrist, the handless other by a cuff about the prince’s
thin upper arm.
   Morgenes finished smearing his hands and passed pot and bag to Simon.
“Now be a good lad,” he said, “and cover your eyes. I traded a silk-bound
volume of Plesinnen Myrmenis—the only one north of Perdruin—for this
muck. I just hope—Simon, do cover your eyes . . .”
   As the youth raised his hands he saw Morgenes reaching for the ring that
bound the prince’s chains to the stone. An instant later a flash of light glared
pinkly through Simon’s meshed fingers, accompanied by a crack like
hammer on slate. When the youth looked again Prince Josua lay with his
chains in a heap on the floor and Morgenes kneeled beside him, palms
smoking. The wall-ring was blackened and twisted like a burnt bannock.
   “Faugh!” the doctor gasped, “I hope . . . I hope I . . . never have to do
that again. Can you pick up the prince, Simon? I am very weak.”
   Josua rolled stiffly over and looked around. “I . . . think . . . I can . . .
walk. Pryrates . . . gave me something.”
   “Nonsense.” Morgenes took a deep breath and climbed shakily to his
feet. “Simon is a strong lad—come on, boy, don’t gape! Pick him up!”
   After some maneuvering Simon managed to wrap the hanging strands of
Josua’s chains, still attached at wrist and arm, into a loop around the
prince’s waist. Then, with Morgenes’ assistance, he somehow hoisted Josua
up like a pickaback child. He stood and sucked in a great draught of air. For
a moment he feared he could not bear up, but with a clumsy hop he moved
Josua higher on his back and found that even with the added weight of the
chains it was not impossible.
  “Wipe that silly smile off your face, Simon,” the doctor said, “we still
have to get him up the ladder.”

                                     •••

   Somehow they managed—Simon grunting, almost weeping with the
exertion, Josua pulling weakly at the rungs, Morgenes pushing behind and
whispering encouragement. It was a long, nightmarish climb, but at last
they reached the main storeroom. Morgenes scurried past as Simon leaned
against a bale to rest, the prince still clinging to his back.
   “Somewhere, somewhere . . .” Morgenes muttered, pushing his way
between the close-stacked goods. When he reached the southern wall of the
room, shining his crystal before him, he began to search in earnest.
   “What . . . ?” Simon started to ask, but the doctor silenced him with a
gesture. As they watched Morgenes appear and disappear behind piles of
barrels, Simon felt a delicate touch on his hair. The prince was patting
gently at his head.
   “Real. Real!” Josua breathed. Simon felt something wet run down his
neck.
   “Found it!” came Morgenes’ hushed but triumphant cry. “Come along!”
Simon rose, staggering a little, and carried the prince forward. The doctor
was standing beside the blank stone wall, gesturing toward a pyramid of
large casks. The lamp-crystal gave him the shadow of a looming giant.
   “Found what?” Simon adjusted the prince and stared. “Barrels?”
   “Indeed!” the doctor cackled. With a flourish he twisted the round rim of
the topmost cask a half-turn. The whole side of the barrel swung open as if
it were a door, revealing cavernous darkness beyond.
   Simon stared suspiciously. “What’s that?”
   “A passageway, you foolish boy.” Morgenes took his elbow and guided
him toward the open-sided barrel, which stood scarcely more than chest-
high. “This castle is honeycombed with such secret byways.”
   With a frown Simon stooped, peering at the black depths beyond. “In
there?”
   Morgenes nodded. Simon, realizing he could not walk through, got down
on his knees to inch inside, the prince riding his back as if he were a festival
pony. “I didn’t know there were such passages in the storerooms,” he said,
his voice echoing in the barrel. Morgenes leaned down to guide Josua’s
head under the low entrance.
   “Simon, there are more things you don’t know than there are things that I
do know. I despair of the imbalance. Now close your mouth and let’s
hurry.”
   They were able to stand again on the far side: Morgenes’ crystal revealed
a long, angled corridor, unremarkable but for a fabulous accumulation of
dust.
   “Ah, Simon,” Morgenes said as they hurried along, “I only wish I had
time to show you some of the rooms past which this hallway creeps—some
were the chambers of a very great, very beautiful lady. She used this
passage to keep her secret assignations.” The doctor looked up at Josua,
whose face lay against Simon’s neck. “Sleeping, now,” Morgenes
murmured. “All sleeping.”
   The corridor climbed and dipped, turning one way and another. They
passed many doors, some whose locks were rusted shut, some whose
handles were as shiny as a new fithing piece. Once they passed a series of
small windows; in a brief glance Simon was startled to see the sentries on
the western wall, silhouetted against the sky. The clouds were tinted a faint
rose where the sun had gone.
   We must be above the dining hall, Simon marveled. When did we do all
the climbing?

                                    •••

   They were stumbling in exhaustion when Morgenes finally stopped.
There were no windows in this part of the winding corridor, only tapestries.
Morgenes lifted one, revealing gray stone beneath.
   “Wrong tapestry,” the doctor panted, lifting the next one to reveal a door
of rough wood. He laid his ear against it and listened for a moment, then
pulled it open.
   “Hall of Records.” He gestured at the torchlit hallway beyond. “Only a
few . . . hundred paces from my chambers . . .” When Simon and his
passenger had come through, he let the door swing shut behind; it closed
with an authoritative bump. Looking back, Simon could not distinguish it
from other wooden panels that lined the corridor wall.
   There was only one last dash to be made in the open, a relatively rapid
sprint from the easternmost door of the archive rooms, across the open
commons. As they lurched across the shadowed grass, staying as close to
the walls as they could without tripping through the ivy, Simon thought he
saw a movement in the shadows of the wall across the yard: something
large that shifted slightly as though to watch their passage, a familiar, stoop-
shouldered form. But the light was dying fast and he could not be sure—it
was only one more black spot moving before his eyes.

                                     •••

   He had a stitch in his side that felt as though someone had caught his rib
with Ruben’s foundry-tongs. Morgenes, who had limped ahead, held the
door open. Simon tottered through, carefully put his burden down, then
pitched full-length on the cool flagstones, sweaty and breathless. The world
spun about him in a giddy dance.
   “Here, your Highness, drink this—go on,” he heard Morgenes say. After
some little while he opened his eyes and lifted himself on one elbow. Josua
sat propped against the wall; Morgenes crouched over him holding a brown
ceramic jug.
   “Better?” the doctor asked.
   The prince nodded weakly. “Stronger already. This liquor feels like what
Pryrates gave me . . . but not so bitter. Said that I was weakening too
fast . . . that they needed me tonight.”
   “Needed you? I don’t like the sound of that, not at all.” Morgenes
brought the jug over to Simon. The drink was busy and sour to the taste, but
warming. The doctor peered out the door, then dropped the bolt.
   “Tomorrow is Belthainn Day, the first of Maia,” he said. “Tonight is . . .
tonight is a very bad night, my prince. Stoning Night, it is called.”
   Simon felt the doctor’s liquor burning pleasantly as it moved down to his
stomach. The ache in his joints lessened, as though a twisted length of cloth
had been slackened a turn or two. He sat up, feeling dizzy.
   “I find it ominous, their ‘needing’ you on such a night,” Morgenes
repeated. “I fear worse things even than the imprisoning of the king’s
brother.”
   “The imprisoning itself was bad enough for me.” A wry grimace
stretched Josua’s gaunt features, then disappeared. Deep lines of sorrow
took its place. “Morgenes,” he said a moment later, his voice cracking,
“those . . . those whoreson bastards killed my men. They ambushed us.”
   The doctor raised his hand as though to grasp the prince’s shoulder, then
put it awkwardly back down. “I’m sure, my lord, I’m sure. Do you know
for certain whether your brother was responsible? Could it have been
Pryrates acting alone?”
   Josua shook his head wearily. “I don’t know. The men who attacked us
wore no insignia, and I never saw anyone but the priest once I was brought
here . . . but it is astonishing to consider Pryrates doing such a thing without
Elias.”
   “True.”
   “But why?! Why, damn them? I do not covet power—the reverse, if
anything! You know that, Morgenes. Why should they do this?”
   “My prince, I am afraid I do not have the answers right this instant, but I
must say this goes far toward confirming my suspicions about . . . other
things. About . . . northern matters. Do you remember hearing of the white
foxes?” Morgenes’ tone was significant, but the prince only cocked an
eyebrow and said nothing. “Well, there is no time to spend talking of my
fears at this moment. Our time is short, and we must attend to more
immediate matters.”
   Morgenes helped Simon up from the floor, then went puttering off in
search of something. The youth stood looking shyly at Prince Josua, who
remained slumped against the wall, eyes closed. The doctor returned with a
hammer, its head rounded by much use, and a chisel.
   “Strike off Josua’s chains, will you, lad? I have a few things left to attend
to.” He scuttled off again.
   “Your Highness?” Simon said quietly, approaching the prince. Josua
opened bleary eyes and stared first at the youth, then at the tools he carried.
He nodded.
   Kneeling at the prince’s side he burst the lock on the band that encircled
Josua’s right arm with a pair of sharp blows. As he moved round to the
prince’s left, Josua opened his eyes again and laid a restraining hand on
Simon’s arm.
   “Take only the chain from this side, young one.” A ghostly smile
flickered across his face. “Leave me the shackle to remember my brother
by. Leave me his band.” He displayed the puckered stump of his right wrist.
“We have a sort of tally system, you see.”
   Simon, suddenly chilled, trembled as he braced Josua’s left forearm
against the stone flags. With a single stroke he sliced through the chain,
leaving the cuff of blackened iron above the hand.
   Morgenes appeared, carrying a bundle of dark clothing. “Come, Josua,
we must hurry. It is almost an hour after dark, and who knows when they
will go looking for you? I broke my lock-pick off in the door, but that will
not long prevent them discovering your absence.”
   “What will we do?” asked the prince, standing unsteadily on his feet as
Simon helped him into the musty peasant gear. “Who in the castle can we
trust?”
   “Nobody at present—not on such short notice. That is why you must
make your way to Naglimund. Only there will you be safe.”
   “Naglimund . . .” Josua seemed bemused. “I have dreamed so often of
my home there in these horrible months—but no! I must show the people
my brother’s duplicity. I will find strong arms to aid me!”
   “Not here . . . not now.” Morgenes’ voice was firm, his bright eyes
commanding. “You will find yourself back in a dungeon, and this time you
will go quickly to a private beheading. Don’t you see? You must get to a
strong place where you are safe from treachery before you can press any
claim. Many kings have imprisoned and killed their relatives—most got
away with it. It takes more than familial infighting to excite the populace.”
   “Well,” said Josua reluctantly, “even if you are correct, how would I
escape?” A fit of coughing shook him. “The castle gates . . . are . . . are
doubtless closed for the night. Should I walk up to the inner gate dressed as
a traveling minstrel and try to sing my way out?”
   Morgenes smiled. Simon was impressed by the spirit of the grim prince,
who an hour before had been chained in a damp cell with no hope of rescue.
   “As it happens, you have not caught me unprepared with that question,”
the doctor said. “Please observe.”
   He walked to the back of the long chamber, to the corner where Simon
had once cried against the rough stone wall. He gestured to the star chart
whose connected constellations formed a four-winged bird. With a little
bow he swept the chart aside. Behind it lay a great square hole cut into the
rock, set with a wooden door.
    “As I demonstrated already, Pryrates is not the only one with hidden
doors and secret passages.” The doctor chuckled. “Father Red-Cape is a
newcomer, and has much yet to learn about the castle that has been my
home for longer than you two could guess.”
    Simon was so excited that he could hardly stand still, but Josua’s
expression was doubtful. “Where does it go, Morgenes?” he asked. “It will
do me scant good to escape Elias’ dungeon and rack only to find myself in
the Hayholt’s moat.”
    “Never fear. This castle is built on a warren of caves and tunnels—not to
mention the ruins of the older castle beneath us. The whole maze is so vast
that even I do not know the half of it—but I know it well enough to give
you safe-passage out. Come with me.”
    Morgenes led the prince, who went leaning on Simon’s arm, over to the
chamber-spanning table; there he spread out a rolled parchment whose
edges were gray and feathery with age.
    “You see,” said Morgenes, “I have not been idle while my young friend
Simon here was at supper. This is a plan of the catacombs—of necessity
only a partial one, but with your route marked. If you follow this carefully,
you will find yourself above ground at last in the lich-yard beyond the walls
of Erchester. From there I am sure you can find your way to safe haven for
the night.”
    After they had studied the map, Morgenes pulled Josua aside and the two
of them engaged in whispered conversation. Simon, feeling more than a
little left out, stood and examined the doctor’s chart. Morgenes had marked
the path with bright red ink; his head swam following the twists and turns.
    When the two men finished their discussion, Josua collected the map.
“Well, old friend,” he said, “if I am to go, then I should go quickly. It would
be unwise for another hour to find me still here in the Hayholt. I shall think
carefully on these other things you have told me.” His gaze swept around
the cluttered room. “I only fear what your brave acts might bring down on
you.”
    “There is nothing you can do about that, Josua,” Morgenes replied. “And
I am not without some defenses of my own, a few feints and tricks I can
employ. As soon as Simon told me about finding you, I began to make
some preparations. I have long feared that my hand would be forced; it has
only been hastened slightly by this. Here, take this torch.”
   So saying, the little doctor removed a brand from the wall and gave it to
the prince, next handing him a sack that hung next to it on a hook.
   “I have put some food in here for you, and some more of the curative
liquor. It is not much, but you must travel light. Please hurry.” He held the
star chart up and away from the doorway. “Send word to me soon as you
are safe at Naglimund and I will have more things to tell.”
   The prince nodded, limping slowly into the corridor mouth. The torch’s
flame pushed his shadow far down the dark shaft as he turned back.
   “I will never forget this, Morgenes,” he said. “And you, young man . . .
you have done a brave thing today. I hope it will be the making of your
future, someday.”
   Simon knelt, embarrassed by the emotions he felt. The prince looked so
haggard and grim . . . He felt pride, sorrow, and fear all pulling at him, his
thoughts stirred and muddied.
   “Fare you well, Josua,” Morgenes said, resting a hand on Simon’s
shoulder. Together they watched the prince’s torch recede down the low
passageway until it was swallowed by the murk. The doctor pulled the door
shut and dropped the hanging back into place.
   “Come, Simon,” he said then, “we still have much to do. Pryrates is
missing his guest this Stoning Night, and I cannot think he will be pleased.”

                                    •••

   An interval crept by in silence. Simon dangled his feet from his perch on
the tabletop, frightened but nevertheless savoring the excitement that
charged the room—that now hung over all of the staid old castle. Morgenes
fluttered back and forth past him, hurrying from one incomprehensible task
to another.
   “I did most of this while you were eating, you see, but there are still a
few things left, a few unknotted ends.”
   The little man’s explanation enlightened Simon not one whit, but things
had been happening fast enough to satisfy even his impatient nature. He
nodded and dangled his feet some more.
    “Well, I suppose that’s all I can do tonight,” Morgenes said at last. “You
had better wander back and go to bed. Come here early in the morning,
perhaps right after you do your chores.”
    “Chores?” gasped Simon. “Chores? Tomorrow?”
    “Certainly,” snapped the doctor. “You don’t think anything out of the
ordinary is going to happen, do you? Do you suppose that the king is going
to announce: ‘Oh, by the way, my brother escaped from the dungeon last
night, so we’ll all have a holiday and go look for him,’—you don’t think
that, do you?”
    “No, I . . .”
    “. . . And you would certainly not say: ‘Rachel, I can’t do my chores
because Morgenes and I are plotting treason,’—would you?”
    “Of course not . . . !”
    “Good. Then you will do your chores and come back as soon as you can,
and then we will assess the situation. This is far more dangerous than you
realize, Simon, but I am afraid you are now a part of things, for good or for
ill. I had hoped to keep you out of all this . . .”
    “Out of all what? Part of what, Doctor?”
    “Never mind, boy. Isn’t your plate full enough already? I’ll try to explain
what I safely can tomorrow, but Stoning Night is not the best occasion to
speak of things like . . .”
    Morgenes’ words were chopped short by a loud pounding at the outer
door. For a moment Simon and the doctor stood staring at one another; after
a pause the knocking was repeated.
    “Who’s there?” Morgenes called, in a voice so calm Simon had to look
again at the fear showing on the little man’s face.
    “Inch,” came the reply. Morgenes visibly relaxed.
    “Go away,” he said. “I told you I didn’t need you tonight.”
    There was a brief silence. “Doctor,” Simon whispered, “I think I saw
Inch earlier . . .”
    The dull voice came again. “I think I left something . . . left it in your
room, Doctor.”
    “Come back and get it another time,” Morgenes called, and this time the
irritation was genuine. “I’m far too busy to be disturbed right now.”
    Simon tried again. “I think I saw him when I was carrying Jos . . .”
    “Open this door immediately—in the king’s name!!”
   Simon felt cold despair grip his stomach: this new voice did not belong
to Inch.
   “By the Lesser Crocodile!” Morgenes swore in soft wonderment, “the
cow-eyed dullard has sold us out. I didn’t think he had the sense—I will be
disturbed no longer!” he shouted then, jumping to the long table and
straining to push it in front of the bolted inner door. “I am an old man, and
need my rest!” Simon leaped to help, his terror mixed with an inexplicable
rush of exhilaration.
   A third voice called from the hallway, a cruel, hoarse voice: “Your rest
will be a long one indeed, old man.” Simon stumbled and nearly fell as his
knees buckled beneath him. Pryrates was here.
   A hideous crunching noise began to echo through the inner hallway as
Simon and the doctor finally slid the heavy table into place. “Axes,” said
Morgenes, and sprang along the table in search of something.
   “Doctor!” Simon hissed, bouncing up and down in fright. The sound of
splintering wood reverberated outside. “What can we do?” He whirled to
find himself confronted with a scene of madness.
   Morgenes was up on his knees on the table top, crouching beside an
object that Simon recognized after an instant as a birdcage. The doctor had
his face pressed close against the slender bars; he was cooing and muttering
to the creatures within even as Simon heard the outer door crash down.
   “What are you doing!?” Simon gasped. Morgenes hopped down carrying
the cage, and trotted across the room to the window. At Simon’s yelp he
turned to look calmly at the terrified youth, then smiled sadly and shook his
head.
   “Of course, boy,” he said. “I must make provision for you, too, just as I
promised your father. How little time we had!” He set the cage down and
scuttled back to the table, where he groped about in the clutter even as the
chamber door began to rock with the impact of heavy blows. Harsh voices
could be heard, and the clatter of men in armor. Morgenes found what he
sought, a wooden box, and upended it, dumping some shining golden thing
into his palm. He began to move back to the window, then stopped and
retrieved also a sheaf of thin parchments from the chaos of the tabletop.
   “Take this, will you please?” he said, handing the bundle to Simon as he
hurried back to the window. “It’s my life of Prester John, and I begrudge
Pryrates the pleasure of criticism.” Stupefied, Simon took the papers and
tucked them into his waistband beneath his shirt. The doctor reached into
the cage and removed one of its small inhabitants, cupping it in his hand. It
was a tiny, silver-gray sparrow; as Simon watched in numb astonishment
the doctor calmly tied the shiny bauble—a ring?—to the sparrow’s leg with
a bit of twine. A tiny scrap of parchment was bound already to its other leg.
“Be strong with this heavy burden,” he said quietly, speaking, it seemed, to
the little bird.
   The blade of an axe crashed through the heavy door just above the bolt:
Morgenes bent over and picked a long stick up off the floor and broke the
high window, then lifted the sparrow to the sill and let it go. The bird
hopped along the frame for a moment, then took wing and disappeared into
the evening sky. One by one, the doctor released five more sparrows that
way, until the cage stood empty.
   A large piece had been bitten from the door’s center; Simon could see the
angry faces and the flare of torchlight on metal beyond.
   The doctor beckoned. “The tunnel, boy, and quickly!” Behind them
another ragged chunk of wood tore loose and clattered to the floor. As they
sped across the room the doctor handed Simon something small and round.
   “Rub this and you will have light, Simon,” he said. “It is better than a
torch.” He swept the hanging aside and pulled the door open. “Go on,
hurry! Look for the Tanja Stairs, then climb!” As Simon entered the
corridor mouth the great door sagged on its hinges and collapsed. Morgenes
turned.
   “But, Doctor!” Simon shouted. “Come with me! We can escape!”
   The doctor looked at him and smiled, shaking his head. The table before
the doorway was overturned with a smash of glass, and a group of armed
men in green and yellow began to push past the wreckage. In the midst of
the Erkynguard, crouched like a toad in a garden of swords and axes, was
Breyugar, the Lord Constable. In the littered hallway stood the bulky form
of Inch; behind him Pryrates’ cloak flashed scarlet.
   “Stop!” a voice thundered through the room—Simon was still able to
marvel, in the midst of all his fear and confusion, that such a sound could
come from Morgenes’ frail body. The doctor stood now before the
Erkynguard, fingers splayed in a strange gesture. The air began to bend and
shimmer between the doctor and the startled soldiers. The very substance of
nothingness seemed to grow solid as Morgenes’ hands danced strange
patterns. For a moment the torches outlined the scene before Simon’s eyes
as if it were frozen on an ancient tapestry.
   “Bless you, boy,” Morgenes hissed, “Go! Now!” Simon retreated another
step down the corridor.
   Pryrates pushed past the stunned guards, a blurry red shadow behind the
wall of air. One of his hands stabbed forth; a seething, coruscating web of
blue sparks marked where it touched the thickening air. Morgenes reeled,
and his barrier began to melt like a sheet of ice. The doctor bent and swept
up a pair of beakers from a rack on the floor.
   “Stop that youth!” Pryrates shouted, and suddenly Simon could see his
eyes above the scarlet cloak . . . cold black eyes, serpentine eyes that
seemed to hold him . . . transfix him . . .
   The shimmering pane of air dissolved. “Take them!” spat Count
Breyugar, and the soldiers surged forward. Simon watched in sick
fascination, wanting to run but unable to, nothing between him and the
Erkynguards’ swords but . . . Morgenes.
   “ENKI ANNUKHAI SHI’IGAO!” The doctor’s voice boomed and tolled
like a bell made of stone. A wind shrieked through the chamber, flattening
and extinguishing the torches. In the center of the maelstrom Morgenes
stood, a flask in each outstretched hand. In the brief instant of darkness
there was a crash, then a flare of incandescence as the glass beakers
shattered into flame. In a heartbeat fiery streams were running down the
arms of Morgenes’ cloak, and then his head was haloed in leaping,
crackling tongues of fire. Simon was buffeted by terrible heat as the doctor
turned to him once more; Morgenes’ face seemed already to shift and
change behind the blazing mist that enveloped it.
   “Go, my Simon,” he breathed, and he was voiced in flame. “It is too late
for me. Go to Josua.”
   As Simon staggered backward in horror, the doctor’s frail form leaped
with burning radiance. Morgenes wheeled. Taking a few halting steps, he
threw himself with outspread arms onto the screeching, quailing
guardsmen, who tore at each other in their desperation to escape back
through the broken doorway. Hellish flames billowed upward, blackening
the groaning roofbeams. The very walls began to shudder. For a brief
moment Simon heard the harsh choking voice of Pryrates intertwined with
the sounds of Morgenes’ final agonies . . . then there was a great crack of
light and an ear-thumping roar. A hot whip of air flung Simon down the
passageway, blowing the door shut behind him with a noise like the
Hammer of Judgment. Stunned, he heard the grinding, splintering shriek of
the roof timbers collapsing. The door shuddered, wedged shut by many
thousandweight of scorched oak and stone.

                                   •••

  For a long time he lay wracked with sobs, the tears of his eyes sucked
away by the heat. At last he crawled to his feet. He found the warm stone
wall with his hand and went stumbling down into darkness.