
                           Between Worlds




Voices, many voices—whether birthed in his own head or in the
comfortless shadows that surrounded him, Simon could not tell—were his
only companions in that first terrible hour.
   Simon mooncalf! Done it again, Simon mooncalf!
   His friend is dead, his only friend, be kind, be kind!
   Where are we?
   In darkness, in darkness forever, to bat-flitter like a lost shrieking soul
through the endless tunnels . . .
   He is Simon Pilgrim now, doomed to wander, to wonder . . .
   No, Simon shuddered, trying to rein in the clamoring voices, I will
remember. I will remember the red line on the old map, and to look for the
Tan’ja Stairs—whatever they might be. I will remember the flat black eyes
of that murderer Pryrates: I will remember my friend . . . my friend Doctor
Morgenes . . .
   He sank down onto the gritty tunnel floor, weeping with helpless,
strengthless anger, a barely beating heart of life in a universe of black stone.
The blackness was a choking thing that pressed down on him, squeezing out
his breath.
   Why did he do it? Why didn’t he run?
   He died to save you, idiot boy—and Josua. If he had run, they would
have followed; Pryrates had the stronger magic. You would have been
caught, and they would have been free to follow the prince, to hunt him
down and drag him back to his cell. Morgenes died for that.
   Simon hated the sound of his own crying, the hacking, sniveling sound
echoing on and on. He pushed it all up from inside him, sobbing until his
voice was a dry rasp—a sound he could live with, not the weepy bleat of a
lost mooncalf in the dark.
   Lightheaded and sick, wiping his face with his shirtsleeve, Simon felt the
forgotten weight of Morgenes’ crystal sphere in his hand. Light. The doctor
had given him light. Along with the papers crimped uncomfortably in the
waistband of his breeches, it was the last gift the doctor had given him.
   No, a voice whispered, the second-to-last, Simon Pilgrim.
   Simon shook his head, trying to dispel the licking, murmuring fear. What
had Morgenes said as he tied the glinting bauble to the sparrow’s slender
leg? To be strong with its heavy burden? Why was he sitting in the pitch
dark, mewling and dribbling—wasn’t he Morgenes’ apprentice, after all?
   He clambered to his feet, dizzy and trembling. He felt the glassy surface
of the crystal warm beneath his stroking fingers. He stared into the darkness
where his hands must be, thinking of the doctor. How could the old man
laugh so often, when the world was so full of hidden treachery, of beautiful
things with rot inside of them? There was so much shadow, so little . . .
   A pinprick of light flared before him—a needle hole in the sun-shrouding
curtain of night. He rubbed harder and stared. The light bloomed, folding
back the shadows; the passageway’s walls leaped out on either side,
brushed with glowing amber. Air seemed to rush into his lungs. He could
see!
   The momentary elation evaporated as he turned to look up and down the
corridor. A pain in his head made the walls waver before his gaze. The
tunnel was nearly featureless, a lonely hole burrowing down into the
underbelly of the castle, festooned with pale cobwebs. Back up the passage
he could see a crossway he had already passed, a gaping mouth in the wall.
He walked back. A quick shine of the crystal revealed nothing beyond the
opening but tailings and rubble, a sloping pile of debris leading down out of
reach of the sphere’s thin light. How many other cross-paths had he missed?
And how would he know which ones were the right ones? Another wave of
choking hopelessness washed over him. He was hopelessly alone,
hopelessly lost. He would never find himself back in the world of light.
   Simon Pilgrim, Simon mooncalf . . . family dead, friend dead, see him
wander and wander forever . . .
   “Silence!” he growled out loud, and was startled to hear the word
caroming down the path before him, a messenger carrying a proclamation
from the king of Under-the-ground: “Silence . . . silence . . . silen . . . si . . .”
   King Simon of the Tunnels began his staggering progress.

                                        •••

   The passageway squirmed downward into the stone heart of the Hayholt,
a smothering, winding, cobwebbed track lit only by the gleam of Morgenes’
crystal sphere. Broken spiderwebs performed a slow, ghostly dance in the
wake of his passage; when he turned to look back the strands seemed to
wave after him, like the clutching, boneless fingers of the drowned. Hanks
of silky thread stuck to his hair and draped stickily across his face, so that
he had to hold his hand before his eyes as he walked. Often he would feel
some small, leggy thing scuttling away across his fingers as he broke
through its netting, and would have to stop for a moment, head down, until
the shivers of disgust subsided.
   It was becoming colder, and the close-cramped walls of the passageway
seemed to breathe with moisture. Parts of the tunnel had crumbled; in some
places dislodged dirt and stone were piled so high in the center of the path
that he had to push his back against the damp walls and edge around them.
   He was doing just that—squeezing around an obstruction, the light-
wielding hand held over his head, the other feeling before him for a way
past—when he felt a searing pain like a thousand needle-pricks run up his
questing hand and onto his arm. A flash of the crystal brought a vision of
horror—hundreds, no, thousands of tiny white spiders swarming up his
wrist and under his shirt sleeve, biting like a thousand burning fires. Simon
shrieked and slammed his arm against the tunnel wall, bringing a shower of
clotted dirt down into his mouth and eyes. His terrified shouts echoed down
the passageway, quickly failing. He fell to his knees in damp soil, smacking
his stinging arm up and down into the dirt until the flaring pain began to
subside, then crawled forward on his hands and knees, away from whatever
horrible nest or den he had disturbed. As he crouched and frantically
scrubbed his arm with loose soil the tears came again, racking him like a
whipping.
    When he could stand to look at his arm, the crystal’s light revealed only
reddening and swelling skin beneath the dirt, instead of the bloody wounds
he had been sure he would find. The arm throbbed, and he wondered dully
if the spiders were poisonous—if the worst was yet to come. When he felt
the sobs climbing once more in his chest, shortening his breath, he forced
himself to his feet. He must go on. He must.
    A thousand white spiders.
    He must go on.
    He followed the sphere’s dim light downward. It gleamed on moisture-
slick stone and earth-choked cross-corridors, twining with pallid roots.
Surely he must be far below the castle by now—far down into the black
earth. There was no sign of Josua’s passage, or of anyone’s. He was
sickeningly certain he had missed some turning-place in the darkness and
confusion, and was even now spiraling downward into an inescapable pit.

                                     •••

   He had trudged on so long, making so many twists and turns, that the
memory of the narrow red line on Morgenes’ old parchment was now
useless. There was nothing remotely like stairs anywhere in these narrow,
strangling wormholes. Even the glowing crystal was beginning to flicker.
The voices escaped his control again, surrounding him in the crazy shadows
like a shouting throng.
   Dark and getting darker. Dark and getting darker.
   Let us lie down for a while. We want to sleep, just for a while, sleep . . .
   The king has an animal inside him, and Pryrates is its keeper . . .
   “My Simon.” Morgenes called you “my Simon” . . . he knew your father.
He kept secrets.
   Josua is going to Naglimund. The sun shines there all day and night.
Naglimund. They eat sweet cream and drink clear, shining water at
Naglimund. The sun is bright.
   Bright and hot. It is hot. Why?
   The damp tunnel was suddenly very warm. He stumbled on, hopelessly
sure that he felt the first fever of spider-poison. He would die in the dark,
the terrible dark. He would never again see the sun, or feel its . . .
   The warmth seemed to push into his lungs. It was getting hotter!
   Stifling air enfolded him, sticking his shirt to his chest and his hair to his
forehead. He felt a moment of even greater panic.
   Have I circled round? Have I walked for years only to come back to the
ruins of Morgenes’ chamber—the burned, blackened remains of his life?
   But it was not possible. He had been going downward steadily, never
once mounting back to anything more than a moment’s level going. Why
was it so hot?
   The memory of one of Shem Horsegroom’s stories pushed forward, a
story of young Prester John wandering through darkness toward a great,
brooding heat—the dragon Shurakai in its lair beneath the castle . . . this
castle.
   But the dragon is dead! I’ve touched its bones, a yellow chair in the
throne room. There is no dragon anymore—no sleepless, deep-breathing
red hulk the size of the tourney field, waiting in the darkness with claws
like swords and a soul as old as the stones of Osten Ard—the dragon is
dead.
   But did dragons never have brothers?
   And what was that sound? That dull, grumbling roar?
   The heat was oppressive, and the air was thick with itching smoke.
Simon’s heart was a lump of dull lead in his chest. The crystal began to dim
as broad smears of reddish light blotted out the sphere’s weaker radiance.
The tunnel flattened, turning now neither left nor right, leading down a
long, eroded gallery to an arched doorway that danced with a flickering
orange radiance. Shivering despite the sweat streaming down his face,
Simon felt himself drawn toward it.
   Turn and run, mooncalf!
   He could not. Each step was a labor, but he moved closer. He reached the
archway and craned his neck fearfully around the portal’s rim.
   It was a great cavern, awash in leaping light. The rock walls seemed to
have melted and set like wax at the base of a candle, the stone smoothed in
long, vertical ripples. For a moment Simon’s light-stunned eyes opened
wide in amazement: at the cavern’s far side a score of dark figures were
kneeling before the shape of . . . a monstrous, flame-blazing dragon!
   An instant later he saw that it was not so: the huge shape crouched
against the stone was a great furnace. The dark-clad figures were forking
logs into its flaming maw.
   The foundry! The castle foundry!
   All around the cavern heavily dressed and scarf-masked men were
smithying the tools of war. Massive buckets of glowing liquid iron were
pulled from the flames on the ends of long poles. Molten metal jumped and
hissed as it drizzled into plate-shaped molds, and above the groaning voice
of the furnace reverberated the clang of hammer on anvil.
   Simon shrank back from the doorway. For a heartbeat he had felt himself
about to leap forward and run to these men—for men they were, despite
their strange dress. It had seemed in that instant that anything was better
than the dark tunnel, and the voices—but he knew better. Did he think these
foundrymen would help him to escape? Doubtless they knew only one route
from the blazing cavern: up and back into the clutches of Pryrates—if he
had survived the inferno of Morgenes’ chambers—or the brutal justice of
Elias.
   He sank down onto his haunches to think. The noise of the furnace and
his own painful head made it difficult. He could not remember passing any
cross-tunnels for some time. He could see what looked like a row of holes
along the far wall of the foundry-cavern; it could be that they were nothing
but storage chambers . . .
   Or dungeons . . .
   But it seemed just as likely that they were other routes in and out of the
chamber. To retreat back up the tunnel seemed foolish . . .
   Coward! Scullion!
   Numb, battered, he balanced on the knife-edge of indecision. To go back,
and wander through the same dark, spider-haunted tunnels, his only light
flickering into extinction . . . or to make his way across the roaring inferno
of the foundry floor—and from there, who could know? Which should it
be?
   He will be King of Under-ground, Lord of the Weeping Shades!
   No, his people are gone, let him be!
   He smacked himself on the head, trying to dispel the chittering voices.
   If I’m going to die, he decided, wresting back the mastery of his speeding
heart, at least let it be in the light.
   He bent over, head throbbing, to stare at the cupped gleam of the crystal
sphere. Even as he looked, the light died, then throbbed back into tenuous
life. He slipped it into his pocket.
   The furnace flame and the dark shapes that passed before them laid
pulsing stripes of red, orange and black along the wall; he dropped down
from the archway to huddle beside the downsloping ramp. The nearest
hiding place was a shabby brick structure some fifteen or twenty ells from
where he crouched, a disused kiln or oven that squatted on the chamber’s
fringe. After a few deep breaths he bolted for it, half-running, half-crawling.
His head ached from the motion, and when he reached the bulky kiln he had
to lower his face between his knees until the black spots went away. The
harsh roar of the feeding furnace rang like thunder inside his head, silencing
even his voices with its painful clamor.
   He made his way from dark place to dark place, little islands of
shadowed safety in the ocean of smoke and red noise. The foundrymen did
not look up and see him; they barely communicated among themselves,
limited in the crushing din to broad gestures, like armored men in the chaos
of battle. Their eyes, points of reflected light above the masking cloth,
seemed instead to stare at one thing only: the bright, compelling glow of hot
iron. Like the red map-line that still snaked a wistful course through
Simon’s memory, the radiant metal was everywhere and all the same, like a
dragon’s magical blood. Here it splashed over the edge of a vat, spattering
in gemlike drops; over there it wound serpentlike away across the rock to
flow hissing into a pool of brackish water. Great tongues of incandescence
sluiced down from buckets, coloring the bundled foundrymen in demonic
scarlet.
   Creeping, scuttling, Simon made his slow way around the rim of the
smelting-cave until he reached the nearest ramp leading out of the chamber.
The oppressive, breathing heat and his own sickened spirit urged him to
climb up, but the packed earth of the ramp showed a deep, crisscrossing
scrawl of cartwheel tracks. This was a much-used doorway, he reasoned,
thoughts blurry and slow. It was not a place he should try.
   At last he reached a mouth in the cavern wall that had no ramp. It was a
difficult scrabble up the smooth—fire-melted? Dragon-melted?—rock, but
his flagging strength held up long enough for him to pull himself over the
lip and collapse full length in the sheltering shadows just inside, the
unpocketed sphere glowing weakly in his hand like a trapped firefly.

                                     •••
   When he knew who he was once more, he was crawling.
   On your knees again, mooncalf?
   The blackness was virtually complete, and he was moving blindly
downward. The tunnel floor was dry and sandy beneath his hands.
   He crawled for a long, long time; even the voices began to sound as if
they felt sorry for him.
   Simon lost . . . Simon lost lost los . . .
   Only the slowly diminishing heat behind convinced him he was actually
moving—but toward what? Where? He crept like a wounded animal,
through solid shadow, heading down, always down. Would he crawl
downward to the very center of the world?
   Scuttling, leggy things beneath his fingers meant nothing now. The
darkness was complete, inside and outside. He felt himself almost bodiless,
a bundle of frightened thoughts bumping down into the cryptic earth.

                                   •••

   Somewhere, sometime later, the darkened sphere he had clutched for so
long that it seemed a part of him began to glow again, this time with a
strange azure light. From a core of pulsing blue the light expanded until he
had to hold the sphere away from him, squinting. He climbed slowly to his
feet and stood panting, his hands and knees tingling where they no longer
touched sand.
   The tunnel walls were covered in fibrous black growths, tangled as
uncombed wool, but through the twining strands gleamed shining patches,
reflecting the new-flowered light. Simon hobbled closer to investigate,
drawing his hand back with a thin wheeze of disgust as he touched the
greasy black moss. Some of his self had come back with the light, and as he
stood swaying he thought about what he had crawled through, and
trembled.
   The wall beneath the moss was covered in some kind of tile, chipped and
scored in many places, missing in others so that the dull earth showed
through. Behind him the tunnel sloped upward, the rut of his passage
stopping where he now stood. Before him the darkness led on. He would try
walking on two legs for a while.
    The passage soon widened. The arched entrances of scores of other
corridors joined the one he traveled, most of them filled with soil and stone.
Soon there were also flagstones beneath his shambling feet, uneven,
fractured stone that nonetheless caught the light of the lantern-sphere with
strange opalescence. The ceiling gradually angled away above him, out of
reach of the blue light; the corridor continued downward into the earth.
Something that might have been the beat of leathery wings fluttered in the
emptiness above.
    Where am I now? How could Hayholt run so deep? Doctor said castles
under castles, down into the world’s bones. Castles under castles . . . under
castles . . .
    He had stopped without knowing it, and had turned to stand before one
of the cross-passages. In some part of his head he could see himself and
how he must look—tattered, dirt-smeared, head wagging from side to side
like a half-wit. A strand of spittle dangled from his lower lip.
    The doorway before him was unblocked; a strange scented air like dried
flowers hung in the black arch. He stepped forward, dragging an arm that
felt like heavy, useless meat across his mouth, holding aloft the crystal
sphere in his other hand.
    . . . ! Beautiful! Beautiful place . . . !
    It was a chamber, perfect in the blue glow, as perfect as if someone had
left it only a moment before. The ceiling was high-vaulted, covered in a
tracery of delicate painted lines, a pattern suggesting thorn bushes, or
flowering vines, or the meandering of a thousand meadow streams. The
rounded windows were choked with rubble, and dirt had poured down from
them to silt the tiled floor beneath, but all else was untouched. There was a
bed—a miracle of subtle, curving wood—and a chair as fine as the bones of
a bird. In the room’s center stood a fountain of polished stone that looked as
if it might fill with singing water at any moment.
    A home for me. A home beneath the ground. A bed to sleep in, sleep and
sleep until Pryrates and the king and the soldiers have all gone away . . .
    A few dragging steps forward and he stood beside the bed, the pallet as
clean and unsmirched as the sails of the blessed. There was a face staring
down at him from a niche above it, a splendid, clever woman’s face—a
statue. Something about it was wrong, though: the lines were too angular,
the eyes too deep and wide, the cheekbones high and sharp. Still it was a
face of great beauty, captured in translucent stone, forever frozen in a sad,
knowing smile.
   As he reached out to gently touch the sculpted cheek his shin nudged the
bedframe, a touch delicate as a spider’s step. The bed crumbled into
powder. A moment later, as he stared in horror, the bust in the niche
dissolved into fine ash beneath his fingertips, the woman’s features melting
away in an instant. He took a stumbling step back and the light of the
sphere glared and then waned to a dim glow. The thump of his foot on the
floor leveled the chair and delicate fountain, and a moment later the ceiling
itself began to sift down, the twining branches moldering into soft dust. The
sphere flickered as he lurched for the door, and as he plunged back out into
the corridor the blue light guttered out.
   Standing in the darkness again, he heard someone crying. After a long
minute he reeled forward, down into the never-ending shadows, wondering
who it was that could still have tears left to shed.

                                     •••

   The passage of time had become a thing only of fits and starts.
Somewhere behind him he had dropped the spent crystal to lie forever in
darkness, a pearl in the blackest trenches of the secret sea. In a last, sane
part of his wandering thoughts, thoughts now unbounded by the hedge of
light, he knew that he was moving still further downward.
   Going down. Into the pit. Going down.
   Going where? To what?
   From shadow to shadow, as a scullion always travels.
   Dead mooncalf. Ghost mooncalf . . .
   Drifting, drifting . . . Simon thought of Morgenes with his wispy beard
curling in flame, thought of the shining comet glaring redly down on the
Hayholt . . . thought of himself, descending—mounting?—through the
black nothing spaces like a small, cold star. Drifting.
   The emptiness was complete. The darkness, at first just an absence of
light and life, began to assume qualities of its own: narrow, choking dark
when the tunnels narrowed, Simon clambering over drifts of rubble and
tangling roots, or the lofty, airy darkness of invisible chambers, full of the
parchment scrape of bat wings. Feeling his way through these vast,
underground galleries, hearing his own muffled footfalls and the hissing
patter of dirt shaken loose from the walls, any remaining sense of direction
fell away. He might be walking straight up the walls, for all he could tell, or
staggering across the ceilings like a maddened fly. There was no left or
right; when his fingers found solid walls again, and doors leading to other
tunnels, he groped mindlessly on through more constricted passageways
and into other bat-squeaking, measureless catacombs.
   Ghost of a mooncalf!
   The odor of water and stone was everywhere. His sense of smell, like his
hearing, seemed to have grown more acute in the blind, black night, and as
he fumbled his way ever downward the scents of this midnight world
washed over him—damp, loamy earth, nearly as rich as bread dough, and
the bland but harsh fragrance of rocks. He was awash in the vibrant,
breathing odors of moss and roots, the busy, sweet rottenness of tiny things
living and dying. And floating through everything, permeating and
complicating all, was the sour, mineral tang of seawater.
   Seawater? Sightless, he listened, hunting the booming sounds of the
ocean. How deep had he come? All he heard were the minute shufflings of
digging things and his own ragged breathing. Had he tunneled beneath even
the unsounded Kynslagh?
   There! Faint musical tones, chiming in the farther depths. Water
dripping.
   Down he went. The walls were moist.

                                     •••

   You are dead, Simon Mooncalf. A spirit, doomed to haunt a void.
   There is no light. There never was such a thing. Smell the darkness?
Hear the resounding nothing? This has ever been.
   The fear was all he had left, but even that was something—he was afraid,
so he must be alive! There was darkness, but there was Simon, too! They
were not one and the same. Not yet. Not quite . . .
   And now, so slowly he did not perceive the difference for a long time,
light came back. It was a light so faint, so dim, that at first it was less than
the points of color hovering before his useless eyes. Then, curiously, he saw
a black shape before him, a deeper shadow. A clot of worms, wriggling?
No. Fingers . . . a hand . . . his hand! It was silhouetted before him, bathed
in a faint glow.
   The close-bending tunnel walls were thick with twining moss, and it was
the moss itself that gleamed—a pale, green-white shimmer that threw only
enough light to show the greater darkness of the tunnel before him, and the
light-blocking shadow of his own hands and arms. But it was light! Light!
Simon laughed soundlessly, and his nebulous shadows crisscrossed the
passageway.
   The tunnel opened out into another open gallery. As he looked up,
astounded at the constellation of radiant mosses sprouting on the faraway
ceiling, he felt a drop of cold water on his neck. More water drizzled slowly
from above, each drop striking the rocks below with a sound like a tiny
mallet falling on glass. The vaulting chamber was full of long pillars of
stone, fat on either end, narrow in the middle; some were as slender as a
hair’s-breadth, like strands of oozing honey. As he trudged forward he
realized, in some remote part of his battered mind, that most of this was the
work of stone and dripping water, not of laboring hands. But still, there
were lines in the dimness that did not seem natural: right-angled creases on
the moss-girdled walls, ruined pillars among the stalagmites too orderly to
be accidental. He was moving through a place that had once known
something other than the ceaseless rhythm of water pattering in stone pools.
Once it had echoed to other footsteps. But “once” only meant something if
Time was still a barrier. So long had he been crawling in dark places, he
might have dug through into the misty future or the shadowed past, or into
unmapped realms of madness—how was he to know . . . ?
   Putting his foot down, Simon felt a moment of shocking emptiness. He
plunged into cold, wet blackness. His hands lit on the far edge as he fell,
and the water proved only as deep as his knees. He thought some clawed
thing clutched at his leg as he yanked himself back out onto the
passageway, shaking from more than the cold.
   I don’t want to die. I want the sun again.
   Poor Simon, his voices responded. Mad in the dark.
   Dripping, shivering, he limped on through the green-glimmered chamber,
watching carefully for the empty blacknesses that next time might not be so
shallow. Faint flickers, glowing pink and white, darted to and fro in the
holes as he stepped across or made his way carefully around them. Fish?
Shining fish in the deeps of the earth?
   Now, as one large chamber opened into another, and another, the lines of
hand-wrought things began to show more clearly beneath the cloak of moss
and stone-drip. They made strange silhouettes in the dim half-light:
crumbled spans that might once have been balconies, arched depressions
matted in pallid moss that could have been windows or gateways. As he
squinted, trying to make out details in the near-darkness, he began to feel
his vision was slipping sideways, somehow—the overgrown shapes,
smothered in shadow, seemed to simultaneously flicker with the lineaments
they had once worn. From the corner of his eye he saw one of the shattered
columns lining the gallery suddenly standing straight, a shining white thing
carved with trains of graceful flowers. When he turned to stare, it was only
a clump of broken stone once more, half-shrouded in moss and encroaching
earth. The deep gloom of the chambers bent crazily at the corners of his
sight, and his head pounded. The ceaseless sound of falling water now
began to feel like hammerblows to his reeling mind. His voices came
chittering back, revelers excited by wild music.
   Mad! The boy is mad!
   Have pity, he’s lost, lost, lost . . . !
   We will have it back, manchild! We will have it all back!
   Mad mooncalf!
   And as he passed down yet one more sloping tunnel he began to hear
other voices in his head, voices he had not heard before, somehow both
more real and more unreal than those which had long been his unwanted
companions. Some of these shouted in languages that he did not know,
unless he had glimpsed them in the doctor’s ancient books.
   Ruakha, ruakha Asu’a!
   T’si e-isi’ha as-irigú!
   The trees are burning! Where is the prince?! The witchwood is in flames,
the gardens are burning!
   The half-darkness was contorting around him, bending, as though he
stood at the center of a spinning wheel. He turned and stumbled blindly
down a passageway and into one more lofty hall, holding his agonized head
in his hands. There was other, different light here: thin blue beams angling
down from cracks in the unseen ceiling above, light that pierced the
darkness but illuminated nothing where it fell. He smelled more water, and
strange vegetation; he heard men running, shouting, women crying and the
ring of metal on metal. In the strange almost-blackness the sound of some
terrible battle raged all around, but did not touch him. He screamed—or
thought he did—but could not hear his own voice, only the ghastly din in
his head.
   Then, as if to confirm his already certain madness, dim figures began to
rush past in the blue-lanced darkness, bearded men with torches and axes
chasing others more slender who bore swords and bows. All of them,
pursuers and pursued, were as transparent and ill-defined as mist. None
touched or saw Simon, although he stood squarely in their midst.
   Jingizu! Ayaai! O Jingizu! came a wailing cry.
   Kill the Sithi demons, harsher voices shouted. Put fire to their nest!
   Hands clutched tight over his ears could not keep the voices away. He
stumbled forward, trying to escape the swirling shapes, and fell through a
doorway, coming to rest at last on a flat landing of gleaming white stone.
He could feel cushioning moss beneath his groping hands, but his eyes saw
nothing but polished blankness. He crawled forward on his stomach, still
trying to escape the horrible voices shrieking in pain and anger. His fingers
felt cracks and pits, but still the stone looked as flawless as glass. He
reached the lip and stared out across a great, level field of black emptiness
which smelled of time and death and the patient ocean. An invisible pebble
rolled from beneath his hand to fall silently for long moments and then
splash in the depths below.
   Something large and white gleamed beside him. He lifted his heavy,
aching head from the lip of the dark tarn and looked up. Scant inches from
where he lay jutted the bottom steps of a great stone staircase, an upward-
sweeping spiral that climbed away, mounting the side of the cavern and
circling the underground lake to disappear at last into upper darkness. He
gaped as an urgent, fractured memory pushed through the clamor in his
head.
   Stairs. Tan’ja Stairs. Doctor said look for stairs. . . .
   He clambered forward, pulling himself up onto the cool, polished stone,
and knew that he was mad beyond salvation, or had died and was trapped in
some terrible netherworld. He was beneath the earth in final darkness: there
could be no voices, no phantom warriors. There would be no light making
the steps gleam before him like moonlit alabaster.
    He began to climb, pulling himself up to the next high step with
trembling, sweat-slippery fingers. As he mounted higher, sometimes
standing, sometimes clawing his way up in a scrabbling crouch, he peered
out from the stairs. The silent lake, a vast pool of shadow below him, lay at
the bottom of a great circular hall, bigger by far than the foundry. The
ceiling stretched immeasurably upward, lost in the blackness above with the
top of the slender, beautiful white pillars ringing the chamber. A foggy,
directionless light glinted on the sea-blue and jade-green walls, and touched
the frames of high-vaulting windows that flickered now with an ominous
crimson glare.
    In the middle of the pearly mists, hovering above the silent lake, sat a
dark, wavering shape. It cast a shadow both of wonder and of terror, and it
filled Simon with inexpressible, pitying dread.
    Prince Ineluki! They come! The Northerners come!
    As this last impassioned cry echoed in the dark walls of Simon’s skull,
the figure at the room’s center lifted its head. Gleaming red eyes bloomed in
its face, cutting through the fog like torches.
    Jingizu, a voice breathed. Jingizu. So much sorrow.
    The crimson light flared. The shriek of death and fear rose from below
like a great wave. At the center of it all, the dark figure lifted a long slender
object and the beautiful chamber shuddered, shimmering like a shattered
reflection, then fell away into nothingness. Simon turned away in horror,
enveloped in a strangling pall of loss and despair.
    Something was gone. Something beautiful had been destroyed beyond
retrieval. A world had died here, and Simon felt its failing cry embedded in
his heart like a gray sword. Even his consuming fear was driven out by the
terrible sadness that cut through him, bringing painful, shuddering tears
from reservoirs that should have been long dry. Embracing the darkness, he
lurched on up the endless climb, winding around the mighty chamber. The
shadows and silence swallowed the dream-battle and the dream-chamber
below him, bringing a black shroud to pull over his fevered mind.

                                      •••
   A million steps passed beneath his blind touch. A million years slid past
as he traveled in the void, drowning in sorrow.
   Darkness without and darkness within. The last thing he felt was metal
beneath his fingers and fresh air on his face.