
                      A Meeting at the Inn




The first thing Simon heard was a humming noise, a dull buzz that
pushed insistently against his ear as he struggled toward wakefulness. Half-
opening an eye, he found himself staring at a monstrosity—a dark,
indistinct mass of squirming legs and glittering eyes. He sat up with a
startled yelp and a great flailing of arms; the bumblebee that had been
guilelessly exploring his nose leaped away in a whir of translucent wings to
search for a less excitable perch.
   He lifted a hand to shade his eyes, startled by the vibrant clarity of the
world around him. The daylight was dazzling. The spring sun, as if on
imperial procession, had scattered gold on all sides across the grassy
downs; everywhere he looked the gentle slopes were rich with dandelions
and long-stemmed marigolds. Bees hurried among them, nipping from
flower to flower like little doctors discovering—much to their surprise—all
their patients getting well at the same time.
   Simon slumped back down into the grass, clasping his hands behind his
head. He had slept a long while: the rich sun was almost straight overhead.
It made the hairs on his forearms glow like molten copper; the tips of his
ragged shoes looked so far away he could almost imagine them the peaks of
distant mountains.
   A sudden cold sliver of memory pierced his drowsiness. How had he
gotten here? What . . . ?
   A dark presence at his shoulder brought him quickly onto his knees; he
turned to see the tree-mantled mass of Thisterborg looming behind him, not
half a league away. Every detail was stunningly clear, a pattern of precise
edges; but for the troubling throb of memory it might have seemed
comfortable and cool, a placid hill rising through encircling trees, banded
with shade and bright green leaves. Along its crest were the Anger Stones,
faint gray points against the blue sky.
    The vivid spring day was now corrupted by a mist of dream—what had
happened last night? He had fled the castle, of course—those moments, his
last with Morgenes, were burned into his very heart—but after? What were
these nightmarish memories? Endless tunnels? Elias? A fire, and white-
haired demons?
    Dreams—idiot, bad dreams. Terror and tiredness and more terror. I ran
through the graveyard at night, fell down at last, slept and dreamed.
    But the tunnels, and . . . a black casket? His head still hurt, but there was
also an odd sense of numbness, as if ice had been laid on an injury. The
dream had seemed so real. Now it was distant, slippery and meaningless—a
dark pang of fear and pain that would drift away like smoke if he allowed it
to—or, at least, he hoped it would. He pushed the memories down, burying
them as deeply as he could, and closing his mind over them like the lid of a
box.
    It’s not as though I don’t have enough things to worry about. . . .
    The bright sun of Belthainn Day had smoothed some of the kinks from
his muscles, but he was still sore . . . and very hungry. He clambered stiffly
to his feet and brushed the clinging grass from his tattered, mud-smeared
clothes. He stole another look at Thisterborg. Did the ashes of a great fire
still smolder among the stones there? Or had the shattering events of the
day before pushed him for a while into madness? The hill stood, impassive;
whatever secrets might lurk beneath the cloak of trees, or nestle in the
crown of stones, Simon did not want to know. There were already too many
hollows that needed filling.
    Turning his back on Thisterborg, he faced across the downs to the dark
breakfront of the forest. Staring across the vast expanse of open land, he felt
a deep sorrow welling up within him, and pity for himself. He was so alone!
They had taken everything from him, and left him without home or friends.
He slapped his hands together in anger and felt the palms sting. Later! Later
he would cry; now he had to be a man. But it was all so horribly unfair!
    He breathed in and out deeply, and looked again to the distant woods.
Somewhere near that thin line of shadow, he knew, ran the Old Forest Road.
It rolled for miles along Aldheorte’s southern perimeter, sometimes at a
distance, sometimes sidling up close to the old trees like a teasing child. In
other places it actually passed beneath the forest’s eaves, winding through
dark bowers and silent, sun-arrowed clearings. A few small villages and an
occasional roadhouse nestled in the forest’s shadow.
    Perhaps I can find some work to do—even to earn a meal, anyway. I feel
hungry as a bear . . . a just-woken bear, at that. Starved! I haven’t eaten
since before . . . before . . .
    He bit his lip, hard. There was nothing else to do but start walking.

                                    •••

    The touch of the sun felt like a benediction. As it warmed his sore body,
it seemed also to cut a little way through the clinging, troubling pall of his
thoughts. In a way he felt new-born, like the colt Shem had brought him to
see last spring, all shaky legs and curiosity. But the new strangeness of the
world was not all innocent; something strange and secretive lurked behind
the bright tapestry laid out before him; the colors were almost too bright,
the scents and sounds over-sweet.
    He was soon uncomfortably aware of Morgenes’ manuscript tucked into
his waistband, but after he had tried carrying the sheaf of parchment in his
sweating palms for a few hundred paces he gave up and slipped it back
under his belt. The old man had asked him to save the thing, and save it he
would. He pushed his shirttail behind it to ease the rubbing.
    When he tired of searching patiently for places to ford the small streams
that webbed the meadows he took off his shoes. The smell of the grasslands
and the moist Maia air, untrustworthy indicators though they were,
nevertheless went some way toward keeping his thoughts from straying
toward the black, hurting places; the feel of mud between his toes helped,
too.
    Before long he reached the Old Forest Road. Instead of continuing along
the road itself, which was wide and muddy and scored with the rain-filled
ruts of wagon wheels, Simon turned west and accompanied its passage atop
the high grass bank. Below him white asphodels and blue gillyflowers stood
abashed and unprotected between the wheelmarks, as though surprised in
the midst of a slow pilgrimage from one bank to the other. Puddles caught
the sky’s afternoon blue, and the humble mud seemed studded with shining
glass.
    A furlong away across the road the trees of Aldheorte stood in endless
formation like an army asleep on its feet. Darknesses so complete that they
might have been portals into the earth gaped between some of the trunks. In
other places were things that must be woodcutter’s huts, noticeably angular
against the forest’s graceful lines.
    Walking, staring at the interminable forest porch, Simon tripped over a
berry-bush and painfully scratched both his feet. As soon as he realized
what he had stumbled over, he stopped cursing. Most of the berries were
still green, but enough had ripened that his cheeks and chin were thoroughly
stained with berry juice when he continued on some minutes later, chewing
contentedly. The berries were not quite sweet yet, but still they seemed the
first serious argument he had found in a long time for the benevolent
ordering of Creation. When he finished, he wiped his hands on his ruined
shirt.
    As the road, with Simon for company, began to mount a long track of
rising ground, definite evidence of human habitation finally appeared. Here
and there in the southerly distance the rough spines of split-wood fences
pushed up from the high grass; beyond these weathered boundary wardens
were indistinct figures moving in the slow rhythms of planting, putting
down the spring peas. Somewhere nearby, others would be moving
deliberately down the rows plying the weed hooks, doing their best to save
the fruits of a bad year. The younger folk would be up on the cottage roofs,
turning back the thatch, beating it down firmly with long sticks and pulling
off the moss that had grown during the rains of Avril. He felt a strong urge
to head out across the fields toward those calm, ordered farms. Someone
would surely give him work, take him in . . . feed him.
    How stupid can I be? he thought. Why don’t I just walk back to the castle
and stand shouting in the commons yard?! Country folk were notoriously
suspicious of strangers—especially these days, with rumors of banditry and
worse drifting down from the north. The Erkynguard would be looking for
him, Simon felt sure. These isolated farms would be very likely to
remember a red-haired young man who had recently passed by. Besides, he
was in no hurry to speak to strangers, anyway—not so close to the Hayholt.
Perhaps he would be better off in one of the inns that bordered the
mysterious forest—if one would have him.
   I do know something about working in kitchens, don’t I? Someone will
give me work . . . won’t they?
   Topping a rise, he saw the road before him intersected by a dark swath, a
crease of wagon tracks that emerged from the forest and meandered south
across the fields: a woodsman’s road, perhaps, a route from the
woodchopper’s harvesting-place to the farmlands west of Erchester.
Something dark stood, angular and erect, at the meeting point of the two
roads. A brief twinge of fear passed through him before he realized that it
was too tall an object to be someone waiting for him. He guessed it to be a
scarecrow, or a roadside shrine to Elysia, the Mother of God—crossroads
were infamously strange places, and the common folk often mounted a holy
relic to keep away loitering ghosts.
   As he neared the crossing he decided that he had been right about it
being a scarecrow—the object seems to be hanging from a tree or pole, and
swayed softly, breeze-blown. But as he came closer he saw it was no
scarecrow. Soon he could no longer convince himself that it was anything
other than what it was: the body of man swinging from a crude gibbet.
   He reached the crossroad. The wind subsided; thin roadway dust hung
about him in a brown cloud. He stopped to stare helplessly. The road grit
settled, then leaped into swirling motion once more.
   The hanged man’s feet, bare and swollen black, dangled at the height of
Simon’s shoulder. His head lolled to one side, like a puppy picked up by the
neck-scruff; the birds had been at his eyes and face. A broken shingle of
wood with the words “M THE KINGS LAND” scratched upon it bumped
gently against his chest; in the road below lay another piece. On it was
scrawled: “POACHED FRO.”
   Simon stepped back; an innocent breeze twisted the sagging body so that
the face tipped away to stare sightlessly across the fields. He hurried across
the lumber-road, tracing the four-pointed Tree on his chest as he passed
through the thing’s shadow. Normally such a sight would be fearful but
fascinating, as dead things were, but now all he could feel was sick terror.
He himself had stolen—or helped to steal—something far greater than this
poor sneak thief could ever have dreamed of: he had stolen the king’s
brother from the king’s own dungeon. How long would it be until they
caught him, as they had caught this rook-eaten creature? What would his
punishment be?
   He looked back once. The ruined face had swung again, as if to watch his
retreat. He ran until a dip in the road had blocked the crossing from view.

                                    •••

   It was late afternoon when he reached the tiny village of Flett. It was
truthfully not much of a village, just an inn and a few houses crouching
beside the road within a stone’s-throw of the woods. No people were about
except a thin woman standing in the doorway of one of the rude houses, and
a pair of solemn, round-eyed children that peered out past her legs. There
were, however, several horses—farm nags, mostly—tied to a log before the
town’s inn, the Dragon and Fisherman. As Simon walked slowly past the
open door, looking cautiously all around, men’s loud voices rolled out from
the beery darkness, frightening him. He decided to wait and try his luck
later, when there might be more customers stopping off the old Forest Road
for the night, and his dirty, tattered appearance would be less notable.
   He followed the road a little farther. His stomach was rumbling, making
him wish he had saved some of his berries. There were only a few more
houses and a little one-room cottage-church, then the road swerved up and
under the forest’s eaves and Flett, such as it was, ended.
   Just past the edge of town he found a small stream gurgling along over
the black, leafy soil. He knelt and drank. Ignoring the brambles and the
dampness as best he could, he took his shoes back off again to use for a
pillow and curled up at the base of a live oak, just out of sight of the road
and the last house. He fell asleep quickly beneath the trees, a grateful guest
in their cool hall.
   Simon dreamed . . .
   He found an apple lying on the ground at the foot of a great white tree,
an apple so shiny and round and red that he hardly dared to bite it. But his
hunger was strong, and soon he lifted it to his mouth and set his teeth in it.
The taste was wonderful, all crunch and sweetness, but when he looked
where he had bitten he saw the thin, slippery body of a worm coiled beneath
the bright surface. He could not bear to throw the apple away, however—it
was such a beautiful fruit, and he was famished. He turned it around and bit
into the other side, but as his teeth met he pulled away and saw once more
the sinuous body of the worm. Over and over he bit, each time in a different
place, but each time the slithering thing lay beneath the skin. It seemed to
have no head or tail, but only endless coils wound around the core,
spreading through the apple’s cool, white flesh. . . .

                                     •••

   Simon awoke beneath the trees with an aching head and a sour taste in
his mouth. He went to the streamlet to drink, feeling faint and weak of
spirit. When had anyone ever been so alone? The slanting afternoon light
did not touch the sunken surface of the creek; as he kneeled for a moment
staring down into the murmuring dark water, he felt he had been in a place
like this before. As he wondered, the soft wind-speech of the trees was
overwhelmed by a rising murmur of voices. For a moment he feared he was
dreaming again, but as he turned he saw a crowd of people, a score at least,
coming up the Old Forest Road toward Flett. Still in the shadow of the
trees, he moved forward to watch them, drying his mouth with the arm of
his shirt.
   The marchers were peasant folk, dressed in the rough cotsman’s cloth of
the district, but with a festive air. The women had ribbons twined in their
unpinned hair, blue and gold and green. Skirts twirled about bare ankles.
Some who ran in front carried flower petals in their aprons which they cast
fluttering to the ground. The men, some young and lightfooted, some
limping gaffers, carried on their shoulders a felled tree. Its branches were as
ribbon-festooned as the women, and the menfolk held it high, swinging it
jauntily as they came up the road.
   Simon smiled weakly. The Maia-tree! Of course. It was Belthainn Day
today, and they were bringing the Maia-tree. He had often watched the tree
go up in Erchester’s Battle Square. Suddenly his smile felt too wide. He
was lightheaded. He crouched lower among the concealing brush.
   Now the women were singing, their sweet voices mixing unevenly as the
throng danced and whirled.

               “Come now to the Breredon,
              Come to the Hill of Briars!
              Put on your merry flower-crown!
              Come dance beside my fire!”

  The men replied, voices ragged and cheerful:

              “I’ll dance before your fire, lass,
              Then, in the forest’s shadow
              We’ll lay a bed of blossoms down
              And put an end to sorrow!”

  Both together sang the refrain:

              “So stand beneath this Yrmansol
              Sing hey-up! Hey-yarrow!
              Stand beneath the Maia-pole
              Sing hey-up! God is growing!”

   The women were beginning another verse, one about hollyhock and lily-
leaves and the King of Flowers, as the noisy band drew abreast of Simon.
Caught up for a moment in the high spirits, his dizzy head full of the
exuberant music, he began to push forward. Not ten paces away on the sun-
blotted road one of the men nearest him stumbled, a trailing ribbon coiled
about his eyes. A companion helped him to disentangle himself, and as he
pulled the gold streamer loose his whiskery face creased in a broad grin.
For some reason the flash of laughing teeth held Simon a step short of
leaving the concealment of the trees.
   What am I doing!? he berated himself. The first sound of friendly voices
and I go bounding out into the open? These people are merrymakers, but a
hound will play with his master, too—and woe to the stranger that comes up
unannounced.
   The man he had been watching shouted something to his companion
which Simon could not hear over the din of the crowd, then turned and held
up a ribbon, shouting to someone else. The tree jounced along, and when
the procession’s last stragglers had passed, Simon slipped out on to the road
and followed—a thin, rag-wrapped figure, he might have been the trees’
mournful spirit wistfully pursuing its stolen home.
   The lurching parade turned up a small hill behind the church. Across the
broad fields the last splinter of sun was vanishing fast; the shadow of the
church’s rooftop Tree lay across the hillock like a long, curve-hilted knife.
Not knowing what was planned, Simon hung well back of the group as they
carried the tree up the slight rise, stumbling and catching on the new-sprung
briars. At the top the men gathered, sweaty and full of loud jests, and
levered the trunk upright into a hole dug there. Then, while some held the
swaying bulk steady, others shored up the base with stones. At last they
stepped back. The Maia-tree tottered a bit, then tipped slightly to one side,
drawing a gasp of apprehensive laughter from the crowd. It held, only
slightly out of plumb; a great cheer went up. Simon, in the tree-shadows,
gave voice himself to a small, happy noise, then had to retreat into hiding as
his throat tightened. He coughed until blackness fluttered before his eyes: it
had been nearly a full day since he had uttered a spoken word.
   Eyes watering, he crept back out. A fire had been kindled at the hill’s
foot. With its highest point painted by the sunset, and the flames jigging
down below, the tree seemed a torch fired at both ends. Irresistibly drawn
by the scent of food, Simon moved near to the gaffers and gossips who
were spreading cloths and laying supper by the stone wall behind the little
church. He was surprised and disappointed to see how meager the stores
were—slim rewards for a festival day, and, dreadful luck, an even slimmer
chance of him making off with any unnoticed.
   The younger men and women had begun to dance around the base of the
Maia-tree, trying to make a ring. The circle, with drunken tumbling-down-
the-hill and other impediments, never became completely joined; the
spectators whooped to see the dancers vainly reaching for a hand to close
on as they whirled giddily by. One by one the merrymakers reeled away
from the dance, staggering, sometimes rolling down the low hill to lie at the
bottom laughing helplessly. Simon ached to join them.
   Soon knots of people were sitting all about the grass and along the wall.
The highest tip of the tree was a ruby spearhead, capturing the sun’s final
rays. One of the men at the base of the hill brought out a shinbone flute and
began to play. A gradual silence descended as he piped, touched only by
whispers and an occasional squeak of muffled laughter. At last the breathing
blue darkness surrounded them all. The plaintive voice of the flute soared
above, like the spirit of a melancholy bird. A young woman, black-haired
and thin-faced, got to her feet, steadying herself on the shoulder of her
young man. Swaying gently, like a slim birch tree in the wind’s path, she
began to sing; Simon felt the great hollowness inside himself open up to the
song, to the evening, to the patient, contented smell of the grass and other
growing things.

        “O faithful friend, O Linden tree.”

  she sang,

              “That sheltered me when I was young,
              O tell me of my faithless one
              Be friend again to me.

              The one who was my heart’s desire
              Who promised all for all in turn
              Has left me lorn, my heart has spurned
              And made of Love a liar.

              Where has he gone, O Linden tree?
              Into the arms of what sweet friend?
              What call will bring him back again?
              O spy him out for me!

              Ask me not that, my mistress fair
              I’d fain not make answer to you.
              For I could only answer true
              And I would your feelings spare.

              Deny me not, O Linden tall
              Tell me who holds him close tonight!
              What woman has o’erthrown my right?
              Who keeps him from my call?
               O mistress fair, then truth I’ll tell
               He’ll not to you come anymore.
               Tonight he walked the river shore
               And stumbled there and fell.

               The river-woman now he holds
               And she in turn holds fast to him.
               But she will send him back again
               All river-wet and cold.

               Thus will he come from there again.
               All river-wet and cold . . .”

   As the black-haired girl sat down again the fire crackled and spat, as if in
mockery of such a damp, tender song.
   Simon hurried away from the fire, his eyes filling with tears. The
woman’s voice had awakened in him a fierce hunger for his home: for the
joking voices of the scullions, the offhand kindnesses of the chambermaids,
his bed, his moat, the long, sun-speckled expanse of Morgenes’ chambers,
even—he was chagrined to realize—the stern presence of Rachel the
Dragon.
   The murmurs and laughter behind him filled the spring darkness like the
whir of soft wings.
   A score or so of people were in the street before the church. Most of
them, in knots of two or three or four, seemed headed through the settling
darkness toward the Dragon and Fisherman. Firelight glowed within the
door there, stippling the loiterers on the porch with yellow light. As Simon
approached, still wiping at his eyes, the odors of meat and brown ale rolled
over him like an ocean wave. He walked slowly, several paces behind the
last group, wondering if he should ask for work right off, or just wait in the
sociable warmth until later, when the innkeeper might have a moment to
speak with him and see that he was a trustworthy lad. It made him fearful
just to think about asking a stranger to take him in, but what else could he
do? Sleep in the forest like a beast?
   As he squirmed through a clump of drunken farmers arguing the merits
of late-season shearing, he nearly tripped over a dark figure huddled against
the wall beneath the inn’s swinging sign. A round pink face with small dark
eyes turned up to stare at him. Simon mumbled noises of apology, and was
moving on when he remembered.
    “I know you!” he said to the crouching figure; the dark eyes widened as
if in alarm. “You’re the friar I met in the Main Row! Brother . . . Brother
Cadrach?”
    Cadrach, who for a brief moment had looked as though he might
scramble away on hands and knees, narrowed his eyes to stare in turn.
    “Don’t you remember me?” he said excitedly. The sight of a familiar face
was as heady as wine. “My name is Simon.” A couple of the farmers turned
to look blearily and incuriously in their direction, and he felt a stab of
fright, remembering that he was a fugitive. “My name is Simon,” he
repeated in a softer voice.
    A look of recognition, and something else, passed over the monk’s
plump face. “Simon! Ah, of course, boy! What brings you, then, up from
the great Erchester to dismal little Flett?” With the aid of a long stick that
had been leaning against the wall beside him, Cadrach climbed to his feet.
    “Well . . .” Simon was nonplussed.
    Yes, what have you been doing, you idiot, that you should strike up
conversation with near-strangers. Think, stupid! Morgenes tried to tell you
that this was no game.
    “I have been on an errand . . . for some people at the castle . . .”
    “And you decided to take the small bit of money left to you and stop at
the famous Dragon and Fisherman,” Cadrach made a wry face, “and have
a bit of something to eat.” Before Simon could correct him, or decide if he
wanted to, the monk continued. “What you should be after, then, is taking
your supper with me, and let me pay your count—no, no, lad, I insist! It is
only a fairness, after the kindly ways you showed to a stranger.” Simon
could not utter a word before Brother Cadrach had his arm, pulling him into
the public room.
    A few faces turned as they entered, but no one’s eyes lingered. The room
was long and low-ceilinged, lined along both walls with tables and benches
so wine-stained, hacked, and carved-upon that they seemed held together
only by the dried gravy and suet with which they were so generously
splattered. At the end nearest the door a roaring fire burned in a wide stone
fireplace. A sooty, sweating peasant lad was turning a joint of beef on a
spit; he winced as the dripping fat made the flames sizzle. To Simon it all
suddenly looked and smelled like heaven.
   Cadrach dragged him to a spot along the back wall; the tabletop was so
cracked and pitted that it hurt to rest his skinned elbows on its surface. The
monk took the seat across from him, leaning back against the wall and
extending his legs down the length of the bench. Instead of the sandals that
Simon would have expected, the friar wore ragged boots, splitting from
weather and hard use.
   “Innkeeper! Where are you, worthy publican?!” Cadrach called. A pair
of beetle-browed, blue-jawed locals that Simon would have sworn were
twins looked over from the opposite table with annoyance written in every
facial furrow. After a little wait the owner appeared, a barrel-chested,
bearded man with a deep scar across his nose and upper lip.
   “Ah, there you are,” said Cadrach. “Bless you, my son, and bring us each
a mug of your best ale. Then, will you be so good as to carve us off some of
that joint—that, and two trenchers of bread to sop with. Thanks to you,
laddie.”
   The owner frowned at Cadrach’s words, but nodded his head curtly and
walked away. As he left, Simon heard him grumble: “. . . Hernystiri
buggerer . . .”
   The ale came soon, and then the meat, then more ale. At first Simon ate
like a starving dog, but after easing his initial, desperate hunger, and
looking about the room to make sure no one was paying them undue
attention, he slowed his pace and began to attend to Brother Cadrach’s
meandering conversation.
   The Hernystirman was a wonderful storyteller, despite the burr of his
accent that sometimes made him a little difficult to understand. Simon was
vastly amused by the tale of the harper Ithineg and his long, long night,
despite being a bit shocked to hear such a story told by a man of the cloth.
He laughed so hard at the adventures of Red Hathrayhinn and the Sithi
woman Finaju that he sprayed ale over his already stained shirt.

                                    •••

  They had lingered a long while; the inn was half-empty when the
bearded innkeeper finished filling their mugs for the fourth time. Cadrach,
with broad gesticulation, was telling Simon of a fight he had once witnessed
on the docks of Ansis Pelippé in Perdruin. Two monks, he explained, had
cudgeled each other into near-unconsciousness during an argument about
whether or not the Lord Usires had magically freed a man from a pig-spell
on the island of Grenamman. Just at the most exciting point—brother
Cadrach was waving his arms so enthusiastically in the description that
Simon feared he would fall off the bench—the tavernkeeper thumped an ale
jug loudly down in the middle of the table. Cadrach, caught in mid-
exclamation, looked up.
   “Yes, my good sir?” he asked, cocking a bushy brow. “And how can we
be helping you?”
   The innkeeper stood with arms folded, a look of suspicion pinching his
face. “I’ve let you stand credit so far ’cause you’re a man of the faith,
father,” he said, “but I must be closing up soon.”
   “Is that all that’s afflicting you?” A smile raced across Cadrach’s round
face. “We’ll be right over to reckon up with you, good fellow. What was
your name, then?”
   “Freawaru.”
   “Well, never fear then, goodman Freawaru. Let the lad and me be
finishing these noggins and then we’ll let you get your sleep.” Freawaru
nodded in his beard, more or less satisfied, and stumped off to yell at the
turnspit boy. Cadrach emptied his mug with a long and noisy swallow, then
turned his grin on Simon.
   “Drink up, now, lad. We must not keep the man waiting. I am of the
Granisian order, you know, and have a feeling for the poor fellow. Among
other things, good Saint Granis is the patron of innkeepers and drunkards—
a natural enough pairing!”
   Simon chuckled and drained his cup, but as he put it down a finger of
memory tugged at him. Hadn’t Cadrach told him when they first met in
Erchester that he was of some other order? Something with a “v”?
Vilderivan?
   The monk was fishing about the pockets of his robe with a look of great
concentration on his face, so Simon let the question pass. After a moment
Cadrach pulled out a leather purse and dropped it on the table; it made no
sound—no clink, no jingle. Cadrach’s shining forehead wrinkled in a look
of concern, and he held the purse up to his ear and slowly shook it. There
was still no sound. Simon stared.
   “Ah, laddie, laddie,” said the friar mournfully, “will you look at that,
now? I stopped to help a poor beggar-man today—carried him down to the
water I did, and washed his bleeding feet—and look what he has done to
repay my kindness.” Cadrach turned the purse over so that Simon could see
the gaping hole slit across the bottom. “Can you wonder why I sometimes
fear for this wicked world, young Simon? I helped the man, and, why, he
must have robbed me even as I was carrying him.” The monk heaved a
great sigh. “Well, lad, I’m afraid I’ll have to prevail on your human
kindness and Aedonite charity to lend me the money that we are owing here
—I can soon pay you back, never fear. Tch, tch,” he clucked, waving the slit
wallet at the gape-eyed Simon, “oh, but this world is sick with sin.”
   Simon heard Cadrach’s words only vaguely, a babble of sounds in his
ale-muddled head. He was looking not at the hole, but at the seagull worked
on the leather in heavy blue thread. The pleasant drunkenness of a minute
before had turned heavy and sour. After a moment he raised his stare until
his eyes met Brother Cadrach’s. The ale and the warmth of the commons
room had flushed Simon’s cheeks and ears, but now he felt a tide of blood
that was hotter still mounting up from his fast-beating heart.
   “That’s . . . my . . . purse!” he said. Cadrach blinked like an undenned
badger.
   “What, lad?” he asked apprehensively, sliding slowly away from the wall
to the middle of the bench. “I’m afraid I was not hearing you well.”
   “That . . . purse . . . is mine.” Simon felt all the hurt, all the frustration of
losing it come welling up—Judith’s disappointed face, Doctor Morgenes’
sad surprise—and the shocked sickness of trust betrayed. All the red hairs
on his neck stood up like boar’s bristles. “Thief!” he shouted suddenly, and
lunged, but Cadrach had seen it coming: the little monk was off the bench
and skittering backward up the length of the inn toward the door.
   “Now wait, boy, it’s a mistake you’re making!” he shouted, but if he
really thought so, he did not seem to have much faith in his ability to
convince Simon. Without pausing for a moment he grabbed his stick and
sprang out the doorway. Simon was after him at a sprint, but was barely
through the doorjamb when he felt himself grappled around the waist by a
pair of bearlike arms. A moment later he was up off the floor, breath
pressed out, legs helplessly dangling.
    “Now what do you think you’re doing, hey?” Freawaru grunted in his
ear. Turning in the doorway, he flipped Simon back into the fire-painted
commons room. Simon landed on the wet floor and lay gasping for a
moment.
    “It’s the monk!” he groaned at last. “He stole my purse! Don’t let him get
away!”
    Freawaru poked his head briefly outside the door. “Well, if that’s true
he’s long gone, that one—but how do I know this isn’t all part of the plan,
hey? How do I know that you two don’t play this monk-and-catamite trick
in every inn between here and Utanyeat?” A couple of late drinkers laughed
behind him. “Get up, boy,” he said, grasping Simon’s arm and yanking him
roughly onto his feet. “I’m going to see if Deorhelm or Godstan has heard
of you pair before.”
    He hustled Simon out the door and around the side of the building,
holding his arm prisoned in a firm grip. The moonlight picked out the
stable’s roof of pallid thatch, and the first tree-sentinels of the forest a
stone-throw away.
    “I don’t know why you didn’t just ask for work, you donkey,” Freawaru
growled as he propelled the stumbling youth before him. “With my Heanfax
just quit I could have used a good-sized young fellow like you. Bloody
foolishness—and just you keep your mouth shut.”
    Alongside the stable was a small cottage, standing out but still connected
to the main body of the inn. Freawaru banged his fist on the door.
    “Deorhelm!” he called. “Are you up? Come look at this lad and tell me if
you’ve seen him before.” The sound of footsteps could be heard within.
    “S’bloody Tree, is that you, Freawaru?” a voice grumbled. “We have to
be on the road at cockcrow.” The door swung open. The room behind was
lit by several candles.
    “Lucky for you we were dicing, and not abed yet,” said the man who’d
opened the door. “What is it?”
    Simon’s eyes went wide, and his heart exploded into horrified pounding.
This man, and the one polishing his sword on one of the bed sheets, wore
the green livery of Elias’ Erkynguard!
   “This young ruffian and thief of a . . .” Freawaru had just time to say,
when Simon turned and butted his head into the innkeeper’s stomach. The
bearded man went down with a startled outrush of breath. Simon sprang
over his kicking legs and headed for the shelter of the forest; in a few
leaping steps he had disappeared. The two soldiers gazed after him in mute
surprise. On the ground in front of the candlelit doorway Freawaru the
tavernkeeper cursed and rolled and kicked and cursed.