
                        The White Arrow




“It’s not fair!” Simon sobbed for perhaps the hundredth time, fisting
the wet ground. Leaves stuck to his reddened knuckles; he did not feel the
least bit warmer. “Not fair!” he murmured, curling back into a ball. The sun
had been up for an hour, but the thin light brought no heat. Simon shivered
and wept.
   And it wasn’t fair—it wasn’t at all. What had he done that he should be
lying damp, miserable and homeless in the Aldheorte forest while others
were asleep in warm beds, or just risen to bread and milk and dry clothes?
Why should he be hunted and chased like some filthy animal? He had tried
to do what was right, to help his friend and the prince, and it had made of
him a starveling outcast.
   But Morgenes got far worse, didn’t he? a part of him pointed out
contemptuously. The poor doctor would probably shift places with you
gladly.
   Even that, though, was beside the point: Doctor Morgenes at least had
possessed some idea of what was involved, of what might happen. He
himself had been, he thought disgustedly, as innocent and stupid as a mouse
who goes out of doors to play tag with the cat.
   Why does God hate me so? Simon wondered, sniffling. How could
Usires Aedon, who the priest said watched over everyone, have left him to
suffer and die in the wilderness like this? He burst out in fresh weeping.

                                   •••
   Rubbing his eyes some time later, he wondered how long he had been
lying there staring at nothing. He pulled himself up, moving away from the
sheltering tree to shake the life back into his hands and feet. He returned to
the tree long enough to empty his bladder, then stalked sullenly down to the
tiny stream to drink. The merciless ache in his knees, back, and neck
rebuked him with every step.
   Damn everyone to Hell. And damn the bloody forest. And God, too, for
that matter.

                                     •••

   He looked up fearfully from his chill handful of water, but his silent
blasphemy went unpunished.
   When he had finished he moved upstream a short distance to a place
where the stream eddied out into a pool, and the turbulent waters were
smoothed. As he crouched, staring at his tear-rippled reflection, he felt a
resistance at his waist that made it difficult to bend over without steadying
himself with his hands.
   The doctor’s manuscript! he remembered.
   He half-stood, pulling the warm, flexible mass out from between pants
and shirt-front. His belt had smashed a crease the length of the whole
bundle. He had carried them so long that the pages were molded to the
curve of his belly like a piece of armor; in his hand they lay bowed like a
wind-breasted sail. The top page was smeared and caked with dirt, but
Simon recognized the doctor’s small, intricate script: he had been wearing
the thin armor of Morgenes words. He felt a sudden fierce pang like hunger,
and put the papers gently aside, returning his gaze to the pool.
   It took a moment to separate his own reflection from the bands and
blotches of shadow cast on the water’s surface. The light was behind him;
his image was largely silhouette, a dark figure with only the suggestion of
features along the illuminated temple, cheek, and jaw. Twisting his head to
catch the sun, he looked from the corner of his eye to see a hunted animal
mirrored in the water, its ear tilted as though listening for pursuit, hair a
tangled hedge of tufts, neck angled in a way that spoke not of civilization,
but of watchfulness and fear. He quickly gathered up the manuscript and
walked up the stream bank.
   I’m completely alone. No one will take care of me ever again. Not that
anyone ever did. He thought he could feel his heart breaking within his
chest.
   After searching for a few minutes he found a patch of sunlight, and
settled down to dry his tears and think. It seemed obvious, as he listened to
the echoing speech of birds in the otherwise soundless forest, that he must
find warmer clothes if he was going to spend nights out of doors—and that
he would certainly have to do until he got farther away from the Hayholt.
He also needed to decide where he was going.
   He began to leaf absently through Morgenes’ papers, each one dense
with words. Words—how could anyone think of so many words at one time,
let alone write them down? It made his brain hurt just thinking about it. And
what good were they, he thought, his lip trembling with bitterness, when
you were cold, and hungry . . . or when Pryrates was at your door? He
pulled two pages apart. The bottom one tore, and he felt as though he had
unwittingly insulted a friend. He stared at it for a moment, solemnly tracing
the familiar calligraphy with a scratched finger, then held it up to catch the
light, squinting his eyes to read.

  “. . . it is strange, then, to think how those who wrote the songs and
  stories that entertained John’s glittering court made of him, in an
  effort to construct him larger than life, less than he truly was.”

   Reading it through the first time, puzzling it word by word, he could
make nothing of it; but as he read it again the cadences of Morgenes’
speech came out. He almost smiled, forgetting for a moment his horrible
situation. It still made little sense to him, but he recognized the voice of his
friend.

     “Consider for example,” it continued, “his coming to Erkynland
  out of the island of Warinsten. The balladeers would have it that God
  summoned him to slay the dragon Shurakai; that he touched shore at
  Grenefod with his sword Bright-Nail in hand, his mind set only on this
  great task.
     “While it is possible that a benevolent God called him to free the
  land from the fearsome beast, it remains to be explained why God
  allowed said dragon to lay waste to the country for long years before
  raising up its nemesis. And of course, those who knew him in those
  days remembered that he left Warinsten a swordless farmer’s son, and
  reached our shores in the same condition; nor did he even think on the
  Red Worm until he had the better part of a year in our Erkynland . . .”

    It was vastly comforting to hear Morgenes’ voice again, even if it was
only in his own head, but he was puzzled by the passage. Was Morgenes
trying to say that Prester John had not killed the Red Dragon, or only that
he had not been chosen by God to do so? If he hadn’t been chosen by the
Lord Usires in heaven, how had he killed the arch-beast? Didn’t the people
of Erkynland say he was the king anointed by God?
    As he sat thinking, a cold wind kited down through the trees and raised
gooseflesh on his arms.
    Aedon curse it, I must find a cloak, or something warm to wear, he
thought. And decide where I am going, instead of sitting here mooning like
a half-wit over old writings.
    It seemed obvious now that his plan of the previous day—that of
covering himself with a shallow layer of anonymity, becoming a turnspit or
a scrubber at some rural hostel—was an impossible notion. Whether the
two guardsmen he had escaped would have known him was not the issue: if
they hadn’t recognized him, someone eventually would. He felt sure that
Elias’ soldiers were already beating the countryside for him: he was not just
a runaway servant, he was a criminal, a terrible criminal. Several deaths had
already been paid out over the issue of Josua’s escape; there would be no
mercy for Simon if he fell into the hands of the Erkynguard.
    How could he escape? Where would he go? He felt the panic rising
again, and tried to suppress it. Morgenes’ dying wish had been that he
follow Josua to Naglimund. It seemed now that was the only useful course.
If the prince had made good his escape, surely he would welcome Simon. If
not, then doubtless Josua’s liegemen would trade sanctuary for news of
their lord. Still, it was a dismally long way to Naglimund; Simon knew the
route and distance only by repute, but no one would call it short. If he
continued to follow the Old Forest Road west, eventually it would cross the
Wealdhelm Road, which ran northward along the base of the hills from
which it took its name. If he could find the Wealdhelm way, he would at
least be headed in the right direction.
   With a strip torn from the hem of his shirt he bound the papers up, rolling
them into a cylinder and wrapping the cloth around it, tying it with a careful
twist of the ends. He noticed that he had neglected a page; it lay to one side,
and as he picked it up he saw that it was the one his own sweat had
smeared. In the blur of ruined letters one sentence had escaped; the words
leaped out at him.

  “. . . If he was touched by divinity, it was most evident in his comings
  and goings, in his finding the correct place to be at the most suitable
  time, and profiting thereby . . .”

   It was not exactly a fortune-telling or a prophecy, but it strengthened him
a little, and hardened his resolve. Northward it would be—northward to
Naglimund.

                                     •••

   A prickly, painful, miserable day’s journey in the lee of the Old Forest
Road was salvaged in part by a fortuitous discovery. As he stilted through
the brush, skirting the occasional cottage that crouched within hailing
distance of the road, he caught a glimpse through the chink in the forest
cover of a treasure beyond price: someone’s untended washing. As he crept
toward the tree, whose branches were festooned with damp clothes and one
rank, sodden blanket, he kept his eye on the shabby, bramble-thatched cabin
that stood a few paces away. His heart beat swiftly as he pulled down a
wool cloak so heavy with moisture that he staggered when it slid free into
his arms. No alarm was raised from the cottage; in fact, no one seemed to
be about anywhere. For some reason this made him feel even worse about
the theft. As he scrambled back into the tangled trees with his burden, he
saw again in his mind’s eye a crude wooden sign bumping against an
unbreathing chest.
   The thing of it was, Simon quickly realized, living the outlaw life was
nothing at all like the stories of Jack Mundwode the Bandit that Shem had
told him. In his imaginings Aldheorte Forest had been a sort of endless high
hall with a floor of smooth turf and tall tree-trunk pillars propping a distant
ceiling of leaves and blue sky, an airy pavilion where knights like Sir
Tallistro of Perdruin or the great Camaris rode prancing chargers and
delivered ensorcelled ladies from hideous fates. Stranded in an
uncompliant, almost malevolent reality, Simon found that the trees of the
forest fringe huddled close together, branches intertwining like slip-knotted
snakes. The undergrowth itself was an obstacle, an endless humped field of
brambles and fallen trunks that lay nearly invisible beneath moss and
moldering leaves.
   In those first days, when he occasionally found himself in a clearing and
could walk unencumbered for a short while, the sound of his own footfalls
drumming on the loose-packed soil made him feel exposed. He caught
himself hurrying across the dells in the slanting sunlight, praying for the
security of the undergrowth again. This failure of nerve so infuriated him
that he forced himself to cross these clearings slowly. Sometimes he even
sang brave songs, listening to the echo as though the sound of his voice
quailing and dying in the muffling trees was the most natural thing in the
world, but once he had regained the brambles he could seldom remember
what he had sung.
   Although memories of his life at the Hayholt still filled his head, they
had become wisps of remembrance that seemed increasingly distant and
unreal, replaced by a growing fog of anger and bitterness and despair. His
home and happiness had been stolen from him. Life at the Hayholt had been
a grand and easeful thing: the people kind, the accommodations
wonderfully comfortable. Now, he crashed through the tortuous forest hour
after bleak hour, awash in misery and self-pity. He felt his old Simon-self
vanishing away, and more and more of his waking thought revolving
around only two things: moving forward and eating.
   At first he had pondered long over whether he should take the open
roadway for speed and risk discovery, or try and follow it from the safety of
the forest. The last had seemed the better idea, but he quickly discovered
that the two, road and forest fringe, diverged widely at certain points, and in
the thick tangle of Oldheart it was often frighteningly difficult to find the
road again. He also realized with painful embarrassment that he did not
have the slightest idea of how to make a fire, something he had never
thought about as he listened to Shem describing droll Mundwode and his
bandit fellows feasting on roast venison at their woodland table. With no
torch to light his way, it seemed that the only possible thing to do was to
follow the road at night, when moonlight permitted it. He would then sleep
by daylight, and use the remaining hours of sun to slog through the forest.
   No torch meant no cook-fire, and this was in some ways the hardest blow
of all. From time to time he found clutches of speckled eggs deposited by
the mother grouse in hiding-holes of matted grass. These provided some
nourishment, but it was hard to suck out the sticky, cold yolks without
thinking of the warm, scented glories of Judith’s kitchen, and to reflect
bitterly on the mornings when he had been in such a tearing hurry to see
Morgenes or get out to the tourney field that he had left great chunks of
butter and honey-smeared bread untouched on his plate. Now, suddenly, the
thought of a buttered crust was a dream of riches.
   Incapable of hunting, knowing little or nothing about what wild plants
might be eaten without harm, Simon owed his survival to pilferage from the
gardens of local cotsmen. Keeping a wary eye out for dogs or angry
residents, he would swoop down from the shelter of the forest to rifle the
pitifully sparse vegetable patches, scraping up carrots and onions or
hurriedly plucking apples from lower branches—but even these meager
goods were few and far between. Often as he walked, the hunger pains were
so great that he would shout out in anger, kicking savagely at the tangling
shrubbery. Once he kicked so hard and screamed so loudly that when he fell
down on his face in the undergrowth he could not get up for a long time. He
lay listening to the echoes of his cries disappear, and thought he would die.
   No, life in the forest was not a tenth so glorious as he had imagined it in
those long-ago Hayholt afternoons, crouching in the stables smelling hay
and tack leather, listening to Shem’s stories. The mighty Oldheart was a
dark and miserly host, jealous of doling comforts out to strangers. Hiding in
thorny brush to sleep away the hours of sun, making his damp, shivering
way through the darkness beneath the tree-netted moon, or scuttling
furtively through the garden plots in his sagging, too-large cloak, Simon
knew he was more rabbit than rogue.
                                     •••

   Although he carried the rolled pages of Morgenes’ life of John wherever
he went, clutching them like a baton of office or a priest’s blessed Tree, less
and less often as the days passed did he actually read them. At the thin end
of the day, between a pathetic meal—if any—and the frightening, close-
leaning darkness of the world out of doors, he would open the bundle and
read a part of a page, but every day the sense of it seemed harder to grasp.
One page, on which the names of John, Eahlstan the Fisher King, and the
dragon Shurakai were prominent, caught his mayfly attention, but after he
had read it through four times, struggling, he realized that it made no more
sense to him than would the year-lines on a piece of timber. By his fifth
afternoon in the forest he only sat, crying softly, with the pages spread on
his lap. He absently stroked the smooth parchment, as he had once
scratched the kitchen cat uncountable years ago, in a warm, bright room
that smelled of onions and cinnamon. . . .

                                     •••

   A week and a day out from the Dragon and Fisherman he passed within
shouting distance of the village of Sistan, a settlement only slightly larger
than Flett. The twin clay chimneys of Sistan’s roadhouse were smoking, but
the road was empty, the sun bright. Simon peered down a hillside from the
clump of silvery birches and the memory of his last hot meal struck him
like a physical blow, weakening his knees so that he almost fell. That long-
lost evening, despite its conclusion, seemed almost like Doctor Morgenes’
onetime description of the pagan paradise of the old Rimmersgarders:
eternal drinking and storytelling; merrymaking without end.
   He crept down the hill toward the quiet roadhouse, hands trembling,
forming wild plans of stealing a meat pie from an unguarded windowsill, or
slipping in a back door to pillage the kitchen. He was out of the trees and
halfway down the slope when he suddenly realized what he was doing:
walking out of the woods at unshadowed noon, a sickened, feverish animal
that had lost its self-protective instincts. Feeling suddenly naked despite his
bramble-studded wool cloak he froze in place, then whirled and scrambled
away, back up to the swan-slim birch trees. Now even they seemed too
exposed; cursing and sobbing, he clambered past to the thicker shadows,
drawing Oldheart around him like a cloak.




   Five days west of Sistan the begrimed and famished youth found himself
crouched on another slope, peering down into a forest dell at a rough split-
log hut. He was sure—as sure as he could be with his thoughts so piteously
scatted and fragmented—that another day without real food or another
solitary night spent in the chill, uncaring forest would leave him really and
finally deranged: he would become completely the beast he more and more
frequently felt himself to be. His thoughts were turning foul and brutish:
food, dark hiding-places, weary forest tramping, these were his all-
consuming preoccupations. It was increasingly difficult to remember the
castle—had it been warm there? Had people spoken to him?—and when a
branch had lanced his tunic and scored his ribs the day before he had only
been able to growl and flail at it—a beast!
   Somebody . . . somebody lives here . . .
   The woodsman’s cottage had a front path lined with tidy stones. A stack
of halved timbers nestled beneath the eaves against the side wall. Surely, he
reasoned, sniffling quietly, surely somebody here would take pity on him if
he walked to the door and calmly asked for some food.
   I’m so hungry. It’s not fair. It’s not right! Somebody must feed me . . .
somebody . . .
   He went slowly down the hill on stiff legs, his mouth gaping open and
closed. A flagging recollection of the social contract told him that he must
not frighten these rustic people, these suspicious woodsfolk in their tree-
tiered hollow. He held his empty palms before him as he walked, pale
fingers thrust wide apart in a dumb show of harmlessness.
   The cottage was empty, or else the inhabitants were simply not
responding to his sore-knuckled knocking. He walked around the little hut,
dragging his fingertips along the rough wood. The single window was
shuttered with a wide plank. He rapped again, harder; only hollow echoes
answered.
   As he sank into a crouch beneath the boarded window, wondering
desperately if he could batter it open with a piece of firewood, a rustling,
snapping noise from the stand of trees before him brought him back upright
so quickly that his vision momentarily narrowed to a core of light
surrounded by blackness; he wavered, feeling sick. The tree-fence bulged
outward as though struck by a huge hand, then sprang back with a quiver. A
moment later the silence was skewered again, this time by a strange,
staccato hiss. The noise was transmuted into a rapid stream of words—in no
language that Simon knew, but words nonetheless. After a percussive
instant the glade was quiet again.
   Simon was stone-struck; he could not move. What should he do? Perhaps
the cottager had been attacked by an animal on his way home . . . Simon
could help him . . . then they would have to give him food. But how could
he help? He could barely walk. And what if it was a beast, only a beast—
what if he had only imagined hearing words in that abrupt spatter of sound?
   And what if it was something worse? The king’s guardsmen with bright
sharp swords, or a starvation-slender, white-haired witch? Perhaps it was
the very Devil himself, with ember-red robes and nightshade eyes?
   Where he found the courage, even the strength, to unbend his rigid knees
and walk forward into the trees Simon could not say. If he had not felt so ill
and so desperate he might not have . . . but he was ill, and starved, and as
dirty and lonely as a Nascadu jackal. Wrapping his cloak tightly about his
chest, holding the furl of Morgenes’ writings before him, he limped toward
the copse.

                                     •••

   In the trees the sunlight fell unevenly, strained through a sieve of spring
leaves, dotting the forest floor like a scatter of fithing pieces. The air
seemed taut as held breath. For a moment he saw nothing but dark tree-
shapes and slivers of lancing daylight. In one spot the shafts of light were
jigging fitfully; he realized a moment later that they shone on a struggling
figure. As he took a step forward, the leaves whispered beneath his foot,
and with that sound the struggling ceased. The hanging thing—it dangled
fully a yard off the spongy ground—lifted its head and stared at him. It had
the face of a man, but the merciless topaz eyes of a cat.
   Simon leaped back, his heart tipping in his chest; he flung out his hands,
fingers spread wide as though to block out the sight of this bizarre gallows
bird. Whatever or whoever he was, he was not like any man Simon had
seen. Still, there was something achingly familiar about him, as from a half-
remembered dream—but so many of Simon’s dreams were now bad ones.
What a strange apparition! Although caught in a cruel trap, pinioned at
waist and elbows by a noose of snaky black rope and hanging from a
bobbing branch out of reach of the earth, still this prisoner looked fierce,
unhumbled: a treed fox who would die with his teeth in a hound’s throat.
   If he was a man, he was a very slender man. His high-cheeked, thin-
boned face reminded Simon for a moment—a horrifyingly cold moment—
of the black-robed creatures on Thisterborg, but where they had been pale,
white-skinned as blindfish, this one was golden brown like polished oak.
   Trying to get a better look in the dim light, Simon took a step forward;
the prisoner narrowed his eyes, then skinned back his lips, baring his teeth
in a feline hiss. Something in the way he did it, something inhuman about
the way his quite-human face moved, told Simon in an instant that this was
no man trapped here like a weasel . . . this was something different. . . .
   Simon had moved closer than was prudent, and as he stared into the
flecked-amber eyes the prisoner lashed out, bringing cloth-booted feet up
into the youth’s ribcage. Simon, though he had seen the momentary
backswing and anticipated the assault, still received a painful blow in the
side, so swift was the prisoner’s movement. He stumbled back, glowering at
his attacker, who scowled horribly in return.
   As he faced the stranger across the span of a man’s height, Simon
watched the somehow unnatural muscles draw the mouth open in a sneer,
and the Sitha—for Simon had realized suddenly, as if someone had told
him, that this hanging creature was exactly that—the Sitha spat out a single
awkward word in Simon’s Westerling tongue.
   “Coward!”
   Simon was so angered by this that he nearly charged forward, starvation
and fear and aching limbs notwithstanding . . . until he realized that this was
just what the Sitha’s oddly-accented jibe had been meant to accomplish.
Simon pushed down the pain of his kicked ribs, folded his hands over his
chest, and stared at the trapped Sitha-man; he had the grim satisfaction of
seeing what he felt sure was a squirm of frustration.
   The Fair One, as Rachel had always superstitiously referred to the race,
wore a strange, soft robe and pants of a slithery brown material only a shade
darker than his skin. Belt and ornaments of shiny green stone contrasted
most wonderfully with his hair—lavender-blue like mountain heather,
pulled back close against his head by a bone ring, dangling in a horse-tail
behind one ear. He seemed only slightly shorter, although much thinner,
than Simon—but the youth had not seen himself recently in any reflection
but murky forest pools; perhaps now he, too, looked this scrawny and wild.
But even so, still there were differences, not-quite-definable things: birdlike
motions of the head and neck, an odd fluidity in the pivoting of joints, an
aura of power and control that was discernible even while its possessor
hung like an animal in the crudest of traps. This Sitha, this dream-haunter,
was unlike anything Simon had known. He was terrifying and thrilling . . .
he was alien.
   “I don’t . . . don’t want to hurt you,” Simon said at last, and realized he
was speaking as though to a child. “I didn’t set the trap.” The Sitha
continued to regard him with baleful crescent eyes.
   What terrible pain he must be hiding, Simon marveled. His arms are
pulled up so far that . . . that I would be screaming . . . if it were me!
   Protruding above the prisoner’s left shoulder was a quiver, empty but for
two arrows. Several more arrows and a bow of slim, dark wood lay strewn
on the turf beneath his dangling feet.
   “If I try to help you, will you promise not to hurt me?” Simon asked,
forming his words slowly. “I’m very hungry, myself,” he lamely added. The
Sitha said nothing, but as Simon took another step he coiled his legs up
before him to kick; the youth retreated.
   “Be damned!” Simon shouted. “I only want to help you!” But why did
he? Why let the wolf out of the pit? “You must . . .” he began, but the rest of
his words were snuffed out as a large dark form came swishing and
crackling out of the trees toward them.
   “Ah! Here it be, here it be . . . !” a deep voice said. A man, bearded and
dirty, waded into the little clearing. His clothes were heavy and much
mended: in his hand he swung an axe.
   “Now then, you . . .” he stopped when he saw Simon huddled against a
tree. “Here,” he growled, “who be you? What are you about?”
   Simon looked down at the pitted axe-blade. “I’m . . . I’m just a
traveler . . . I heard a noise here in the trees . . .” He waved his hand toward
the odd tableau. “I found him here, in . . . in this trap.”
   “My trap!” the woodsman grinned. “My damned trap—and there he be,
too.” Turning his back on Simon the man looked the dangling Sitha over
coolly. “I promised I’d stop their sneakin’ and spyin’ and sourin’ the milk,
that I did.” He reached out a hand and pushed the prisoner’s shoulder,
swinging him helplessly back and forth in a slow arc. The Sitha hissed, but
it was an impotent sound. The woodsman laughed.
   “By the Tree, they got fight in ’em they do. Got fight.”
   “What . . . what are you going to do with him?”
   “What do you think, boy? What do you think God’d have us do with
sprites an’ imps an’ devils when we catch ’em? Send ’em back to hell with
my good chopper, that’ll tell you.”
   The prisoner slowly stopped swinging, revolving in a lazy circle at the
end of the black rope like a webbed fly. His eyes were downcast, his body
limp.
   “Kill him?” Simon, ill and weak as he was, still felt a cold wash of
shock. He tried to marshal his straggling thoughts. “You’re going to . . . but
you can’t! You can’t! He’s . . . he’s a . . .”
   “What he’s not is no natural creature, that’s sure! Get away from here,
stranger. You’re in my bit o’ garden, as it were, an’ you got no call to be. I
know what these creatures are a-gettin’ up to.” The woodsman
contemptuously turned his back on Simon and moved toward the Sitha, axe
raised as though to split timber. This timber, though, suddenly heaved,
became a struggling, kicking, snarling beast fighting for its life. The
cotsman’s first blow went awry, grazing the bony cheek and digging a
jagged furrow down the arm of the strange, shiny garment. A ribbon of all
too human-looking blood dribbled down the slender jaw and neck. The man
advanced again.
   Simon dropped down to his sore knees, looking for something to stop
this ghastly struggle, to halt the man’s grunting and cursing, and the
scratchy snarl of the beleaguered prisoner that punished his ears. Groping,
he found the bow, but it was even lighter than it had looked, as though
strung on marsh reed. An instant later his hand closed on a half-buried rock.
He heaved, and it broke free from the clinging soil. He held it over his head.
   “Stop!” he shouted. “Leave him be!” Neither combatant gave him even a
flicker of notice. The woodsman now stood at arm’s length, swiping at his
swirling target, landing only glancing blows but continuing to draw blood.
The Sitha’s thin chest was heaving like a bellows; he was weakening
quickly.
   Simon could not stand the cruel spectacle any longer. Setting free the
howl that had been coiling itself within him through all the interminable,
terrifying days of his exile, he sprang forward, crossing the tiny clearing in
a bound to bring the rock down on the back of the cotsman’s head. A dull
smack reverberated through the trees; the man seemed to go boneless in an
instant. He pitched heavily forward onto his knees and then his face, a surge
of red welling up through his matted hair.
   Staring down at the bloody wreckage, Simon felt his insides heave; he
fell to his knees retching, bringing up nothing but a sour strand of spittle.
He pressed his dizzy head against the damp ground and felt the forest sway
and rock about him.

                                    •••

   When he was able, he stood and turned to the Sitha-man, who again
dangled quietly in the noose. The snaky tunic was laced with streamers of
blood, and the feral eyes were dimmed, as though some internal curtain had
rolled down to block the light within. As haltingly as a sleepwalker, Simon
picked up the fallen axe and traced the taut rope up from the prisoner to
where it wrapped around a high limb of the tree—a limb too high to reach.
Simon, too numb for fear, worked the nicked blade-edge against the knot
behind the Sitha’s back. The Fair One winced as the noose pulled tighter,
but made no sound.
   After a long moment of scraping and rubbing, the slippery knot parted.
The Sitha fell to the ground, legs buckling, and tumbled forward onto the
motionless woodsman. He rolled away from the mute hulk immediately, as
though burned, and began gathering up his scattered arrows. Holding them
like a clutch of long-stemmed flowers, he picked up his bow in the other
hand and paused to stare at Simon. His cold eyes glinted, stopping the
words in Simon’s mouth. For an instant the Sitha, injuries forgotten or
ignored, stood poised and tense as a startled deer; then he was gone, a flash
of brown and green that vanished into the trees, leaving Simon gape-jawed
and deserted.
    The spotted sunlight had not finished rippling on the leaves where he had
passed when Simon heard a buzz like an angry insect and felt a shadow flit
across his face. An arrow stood out from a tree trunk beside him, quivering
gradually back into visibility less than an arm’s length from his head. He
stared at it dully, wondering when the next one would strike him. It was a
white arrow, shaft and feathers alike bright as a gull’s wing. He waited for
its inevitable successor. None came. The stand of trees was silent and
motionless.
    After the strangest and most terrible fortnight of his life, and after a
particularly bizarre day, it should not have surprised Simon to hear a new
and unfamiliar voice speaking to him from the darkness beyond the trees, a
voice that was not the Sitha’s, and certainly did not come from the
woodsman, who lay like a felled tree.
    “Go ahead to take it,” the voice said. “The arrow. Take it. It is yours.”
    Simon should not have been surprised, but he was. He dropped
helplessly to the ground and began to cry—great choking sobs of
exhaustion and confusion and total despair.
    “Oh, Daughter of the Mountains,” the strange new voice said. “This does
not seem good.”