
                            A Net of Stars




Blistered, sore-footed, and clothed in rags, Simon nevertheless felt the
pall of despair begin to lift a little. Both mind and body were badly bruised
by mischance, and he had developed a startled eye and reflexive flinch—
neither of which escaped the sharp gaze of his new companion—but the
brooding horror had been pushed back a short way; it had become, for the
moment, just another painful half-memory. The unexpected companionship
helped to ease the ache of lost friends and lost home—at least to the extent
that he allowed it. A large, secret part of his thoughts and feelings he
continued to hold back. He was still suspicious, and also unwilling to invest
again and risk further loss.
   As they trekked through the cool, bird-trilling halls of the morning forest,
Binabik explained to Simon that he had come down from his lofty home of
Yiqanuc, as he apparently did once a year, on “business”—a series of
errands that carried him to eastern Hernystir and Erkynland. Simon
gathered that it involved some sort of trading.
   “But, oh! my young friend, what disturbances I find this spring-tide!
Your peoples are very upset, very frightened!” Binabik waved his hands in
mock-agitation. “In the outlying provinces the king is not popular, is he?
And they are fearful of him in Hernystir. Elsewhere there is anger and there
is starving. People are afraid to travel; the roads are no longer safe. Well,”
he grinned, “if you wish truth to be told, the roads never were safe, at least
in the areas of isolation—but it is real that there is a change for the worse in
the north of Osten Ard.”
   Simon was observing how the noon sun had set vertical columns of light
among the tree trunks. “Have you ever traveled to the South?” he asked at
last.
   “If by ‘South’ you mean south of Erkynland, my answering is: yes, once
or twice. But please remember: among my people almost any leaving of
Yiqanuc is ‘travel to the South.”
   Simon was not paying very close attention. “Did you travel by yourself?
Did . . . did . . . did Qantaqa go with you?”
   Binabik wrinkled another smile. “No. It was long ago, before my wolf-
friend was born, when I was . . .”
   “How did you . . . how did you get this wolf?” Simon interrupted.
Binabik gave an exasperated hiss.
   “It is a difficult thing answering questions when one is having continual
interruptions with more questions!”
   Simon tried to look penitent, but he was feeling the spring as a bird feels
wind in its feathers. “Sorry,” he said. “I’ve been told before . . . by a
friend . . . that I ask too many questions.”
   “It is not ‘too many,’” Binabik said, using his stick to push a low-
hanging branch away from their path, “—it is ‘piled on top of one and
another.’” The troll barked a short laugh. “Now, which do you want for my
answering?”
   “Oh, whichever you want. You decide,” Simon replied meekly, then
jumped as the troll smacked him lightly on the wrist with his walking stick.
   “It would please me your not being obsequious. That is a trait of
marketplace people who are selling shoddy goods. I am sure to prefer
endless, stupid questions to that.”
   “Ob . . . obseek . . . ?”
   “Obsequious. Flattering with oiliness. It is not liked by me. In Yiqanuc
we say: ‘Send the man with the oily tongue to go and lick the snowshoes.’”
   “What does that mean?”
   “It means that we do not like flatterers. Never mind, then!” Binabik
threw back his head and laughed, black hair swinging, eyes nearly
disappearing as his round cheeks rose toward his brows. “Never mind! We
have wandered as far as the wandering of Lost Piqipeg—wandered in our
conversing, I mean. No, do not ask anything. We will stop here for a rest,
and I will be telling you now about how I met my friend Qantaqa.”
   They chose a huge stone, an outcropping of granite thrusting up from the
forest floor like a speckled fist, its upper half painted by a swath of sunlight.
The young man and the troll climbed up to perch on top. The forest was
silent around them; the dust of their passage slowly settled. Binabik reached
into his bag and produced a stick of dried meat and a goatskin of thin, sour
wine. As Simon chewed, he kicked off his shoes and wiggled his sore toes
in the warming sun. Binabik looked at the shoes critically.
   “We shall have to be finding something else.” He poked the tattered,
blackened leather. “A man’s soul is in peril when his feet are hurting.”
   Simon grinned at this thought.
   They spent a while in silent contemplation of the surrounding forest, the
living greenery of Oldheart. “Well,” said the troll at last, “the first thing that
needs understanding is that my people do not shun the wolf—although we
are not usually having friendships with them, either. Trolls and wolves have
lived side by side for many thousands of years, and we are leaving each
other alone most times.
   “Our neighbors, if so polite a term can be used, the hairy men of the
Rimmersgard, think the wolf a dangerous animal of great treachery. You are
familiar with the men of Rimmersgard?”
   “Oh, yes.” Simon was pleased to be in the know. “They were all about in
the Hay—” he caught himself, “in Erchester. I have talked to many of them.
They wear their beards long,” he added, demonstrating his familiarity.
   “Hmmm. Well, since we live in the high mountains, we Qanuc—we
trolls—and we do not kill these wolves, the Rimmersmen think we are
wolf-demons. In their frost-crazy, blood-feuding brains,” Binabik put on a
look of comical disgust, “it is their thought that troll-folk are magical and
evil. There have been bloody fights, very many many, between
Rimmersmen—Croohok we call them—and my Qanuc-folk.”
   “I’m sorry,” said Simon, thinking guiltily of the admiration he had felt
for old Duke Isgrimnur—who, on reflection, did not seem like the type to
massacre innocent trolls, testy though he was reputed to be.
   “Sorry? You should not be. Now myself, I am thinking that men—and
women—of Rimmersgard are clumsy, stupid, and suffer with excessive
tallness—but I do not think they are then evil, or deserving of being made
dead. Ahhh,” he sighed, shaking his head like a philosopher-priest in a
dead-end tavern, “Rimmersmen are a puzzlement to me.”
   “But what about the wolves?” Simon asked, then silently chided himself
for interrupting. This time Binabik did not seem to mind.
   “My people live on craggy Mintahoq, in the mountains called Trollfells
by the Rimmersmen. We ride the shaggy, nimble-footed rams, raising them
up from tiny lambkins until they have enough bigness to bear us through the
mountain passes. There is nothing, Simon, that is in this world quite like
being a ram-rider of Yiqanuc. To sit your steed, to be wending the pathways
of the Roof of the World . . . to be leaping in a single bound of greatness
across mountain chasms so very deep, so exquisitely deep that if a rock was
dropped by you it would take half a day to strike bottom. . . .”
   Binabik smiled and squinted in happy reverie. Simon, trying to visualize
such heights, suddenly felt a little dizzy and put his palms flat on the
reassuring stone. He looked down. This perch, at least, stood only a man’s
height above the earth.
   “Qantaqa was a pup when she was found by me,” Binabik continued at
last. “Her mother had been probably killed, or from starvation had died. She
snarled at me when I discovered her, a ball of white fur given away in the
snow by black nose.” He smiled. “Yes, she is gray now. Wolves, like people
are doing, often change their colors as they grow, I found myself . . .
touched by her effort at defending. I brought her back with me. My
master . . .” Binabik paused. The harsh cry of a jay filled the moment. “My
master said if I would be taking her from the arms of Qinkipa the Snow
Maiden, then I was assuming duties of a parent. My friends had thought that
I was not being sensible. Aha! I said. I will teach this wolf to carry me just
like a ram with horns. It was not believed—it was not a thing that had been
done before. So many things are things not done before . . .”
   “Who is your master?” Below them Qantaqa, who had been napping in a
splash of sun, rolled onto her back and kicked, the white fur of her belly
thick as a king’s mantle.
   “That, Simon-friend, is another tale to tell: not today. To finish, though, I
will say that I did teach Qantaqa to carry me. The teaching was a
very . . .”—he wrinkled his upper lip—“diverting experience. But there is
no regret in me for this. I travel often, farther than my tribesmen. A ram is a
wonderful jumping animal, but their minds are very small. A wolf is clever-
clever-clever, and they are faithful as a debt unpaid. When they take a mate,
do you know, they are taking only one for their entire lives? Qantaqa is my
friend, and I think her much preferable to any sheep. Yes, Qantaqa? Yes?”
   The great gray wolf sat up, her wide yellow eyes fixed on Binabik. She
dipped her head and uttered a short bark.
   “You see?” the troll grinned. “Come now, Simon. I think we should be to
marching while this sun stands high.” He slid down the rock, and the boy
followed, hopping as he pulled on his ruined shoes.

                                    •••

    As the afternoon passed, and they tramped on through the crowding
trees, Binabik answered questions about his travels, displaying an enviable
familiarity with places Simon had trod only in daydreams. He spoke of the
summer sun revealing the gleaming inner facets of icy Mintahoq like a
jeweler’s deft hammer; of the northernmost regions of this same Aldheorte
Forest, a world of white trees and silence and the tracks of strange animals;
of the cold outer villages of Rimmersgard that had barely heard of the Court
of Prester John, where wild-eyed, bearded men huddled over fires in the
shadows of high mountains, and even the bravest of them feared the shapes
that walked the howling darkness above. He spun tales of the hidden gold
mines of Hernystir, secret, serpentine tunnels that wound down into the
black earth among the bones of the Grianspog mountains, and he spoke of
the Hernystiri themselves, artful, dreamy pagans whose gods inhabited the
green fields and the sky and stones—the Hernystiri, who of all men had
known the Sithi best.
    “And the Sithi are real . . .” Simon said quietly, with wonder and more
than a little fear as he remembered. “The doctor was right.”
    Binabik cocked an eyebrow. “Of course Sithi are real. Do you suppose
they sit here in the forest wondering if men are real? What a nonsense! Men
are but a recentness compared to them—although a recentness that has
terribly damaged them.”
    “It’s just that I had never seen one before!”
    “You had never seen me or my people, either,” Binabik replied. “You
have never seen Perdruin or Nabban or the Meadow Thrithing . . . is this,
then, meaning that they do not have existence? What a fund of superstitious
silliness is owned by you Erkynlanders! A man whose wisdom is true does
not sit in waiting for the world to come at him piece by piece for proving its
existence!” The troll stared straight ahead, eyebrows knotted; Simon was
afraid he might have offended him.
    “Well, what does a wise man do, then?” he asked, a little defiantly.
    “The wise man is not waiting for the realness of the world to prove itself
to him. How can one be an authority before the experiencing of this
realness? My master taught me—and to me it seems chash, meaning correct
—that you must not defend against the entering of knowledge.”
    “I’m sorry, Binabik,” Simon kicked at an oak boll and sent it tumbling,
“but I’m just a scullion—a kitchen boy. That kind of talk makes no sense to
me.”
    “Aha!” Quick as a snake, Binabik leaned over and whacked Simon on
the ankle with his stick. “That is being an example, exactly! Aha!” The troll
shook his small fist. Qantaqa, thinking herself summoned, came galloping
back to dart in circles around the pair, until they had to halt to avoid
tripping over the frisking wolf.
    “Hinik, Qantaqa!” Binabik hissed. She bounded off, tail bobbing like any
tame castle hound. “Now, friend Simon,” the troll said, “please forgive my
squeaking, but you have made my point.” He held his hand up to stall
Simon’s question. The youth felt a smile twitching his lips at the sight of the
little troll so rapt and serious. “First,” said Binabik, “scullion boys are not
from fish spawned, or chicken eggs hatched. They can be thinking like the
wisest wise folk, if only they do not fight entering knowledge: if they do not
say ‘can’t’ or ‘won’t.’ Now, it was explaining that I was going to do about
this—do you mind?”
    Simon was amused. He didn’t even mind being struck on the ankle—it
hadn’t really hurt, anyway. “Please, explain to me.”
    “Then, let us be considering knowledge like a river of water. If you are a
piece of cloth, how are you finding out more about this water—if someone
dips in your corner and then pulls it out again, or if you are having yourself
thrown in without resistance, so that this water is flowing all through you,
around you, and you are becoming soaking wet? Well, then?”
    The thought of being flung into a cold river made Simon shiver a little.
The sunlight had begun to take a sideways angle: the afternoon was
dwindling. “I suppose . . . I suppose getting soaked might make you know
more about water.”
   “With exactness!” Binabik was pleased. “With exactness! Thus, you are
seeing my lesson-point.” The troll resumed walking.
   In truth, Simon had forgotten the original question, but he cared little.
There was something quite charming about this little person—an
earnestness beneath the good humor. Simon felt himself to be in good,
although small, hands.

                                    •••

   It was hard not to notice that they were now headed in a westerly
direction: as they tramped along the slanting rays of the sun were nearly full
in their eyes. Sometimes a dazzling bolt would find its way through a chink
in the trees and Simon would stumble for a moment, the forest air suddenly
full of glittering pinpricks of light. He asked Binabik about their westward
turn.
   “Oh, yes,” the troll replied, “we are heading ourselves toward the Knock.
We shall not get there today, though. Soon we will stop to make some camp
and eat.”
   Simon was glad to hear this, but could not forgo asking another question
—it was, after all, his adventure too. “What is the Knock?”
   “Oh, it is not a dangerous thing, Simon. It is the point at which the
southern foothills of Wealdhelm dip down with a saddle-like air, and one
can easily be leaving the thick and not-too-safe forest and cross to the
Wealdhelm Road. As I was saying, though, we shall not reach it this day.
Let us cast around for a camp.”
   Within a few furlongs they found a site that looked promising: a cluster
of large rocks on a gently sloping bank beside a forest stream. The water
splashed quietly along a course of round, dove-colored stones, eddying
noisily around the twisted branches that had tumbled into the stream,
disappearing at last into a thicket a few yards below. A stand of aspens,
green coins for leaves, rattled softly in the beginnings of an evening breeze.
   The pair quickly built a fire circle with dry stones found by the
watercourse. Qantaqa seemed fascinated by their project, darting close at
intervals to growl and lightly snap at the rocks as they were carried
laboriously into place. A short while later the troll had a campfire
flickering, pale and spectral in the last potent sunbeams of the fading
afternoon.
   “Now, Simon,” he said, elbowing the intrusive Qantaqa into an unwilling
crouch, “we find it hunting time. Let us discover some suitable supper-bird
and I will show you clever tricks.” He rubbed his hands together.
   “But how will we catch them?” Simon looked at the White Arrow
clutched in his own sweat-grimed paw. “Will we have to throw this at
them?”
   Binabik chortled, slapping his hide-suited knee. “You have some
funniness for a scullion boy! No, no, I said I will show you clever tricks. Do
you see, where I live there is only a short season for the hunting of birds. In
the cold winter there are not any birds at all, except for the cloud-high-
flying snow geese who pass our mountain home on their way to the
Northeastern Wastes. But in some of the southern lands I have traveled,
they are hunting and eating only birds. There I learned some cleverness. I
will show you!”
   Binabik picked up his walking staff and signed for Simon to follow.
Qantaqa leaped up, but the troll waved her off.
   “Hinik aia, old friend,” he told her kindly. Her ears twitched, and her
gray brow furrowed. “We are going on a mission of stealthiness, and your
big paws will not be a help.” The wolf turned and slouched back to stretch
by the campfire. “Not that she cannot be deadly quiet,” the troll told Simon,
“but it is when she wants to only.”
   They crossed the stream and waded into the underbrush. Within a short
time they were into deep woods again; the noise of the water behind them
had faded to a murmur. Binabik squatted down, inviting Simon to join him.
   “Now we are going to work,” he said. He gave his walking stick a quick
twist; to Simon’s surprise it separated into two segments. The short one, he
now saw, was the handle of a knife whose blade had been concealed within
the hollow length of the longer section. The troll upended the longer
segment and shook it, and a leather pouch slid out onto the ground. He then
removed a small piece from the other end; the long segment was now a
hollow tube. Simon laughed with pure delight.
   “That’s wonderful!” he exclaimed. “Like a conjuring trick.”
   Binabik nodded sagely. “Surprises in small packages—the Qanuc credo,
that is!” He took the knife up by its cylindrical bone handle and poked for a
moment in the hollow tube. Another bone tube slid partway out, and he
finished the removal with his fingers. When he held it up for inspection,
Simon could see that this tube had a row of holes along one side.
   “A . . . flute?”
   “A flute, yes. Of what good is supper without music following?” Binabik
put the instrument aside and poked the leather pouch with the knife tip.
Unfolded, it revealed a pressed clump of carded wool and yet one more
slim tube, this one no longer than a finger.
   “Smaller and smaller we go, yes?” The troll twisted this open to show
Simon the contents, tiny needles of bone or ivory, packed close together.
Simon reached out a hand to touch one of the delicate slivers, but Binabik
hastily pulled the container away.
   “Please, no,” he said. “Be observing.” He plucked one of the needles out
with thumb and arched forefinger, holding it up to catch the dying afternoon
light; the dart’s sharp tip was smeared with some black and sticky
substance.
   “Poison?” breathed Simon. Binabik nodded seriously, but his eyes
showed a certain excitement.
   “Of course,” he said. “Not all are so poisoned—it is not a necessity for
the killing of small birds, and it has an unpleasant tending to ruin the meat
—but one cannot stop a bear or other large, angered creature with only a
tiny dart.” He slid the envenomed needle down among its fellows and
selected another, unstained dart.
   “You’ve killed a bear with one?” Simon asked, extremely impressed.
   “Yes, I have done it—but the wise troll does not stay in the area while
waiting for the bear to know he is dead. The poison is not finishing its work
immediately, you see. Very big are bears.”
   While talking, Binabik had torn off a piece of the coarse wool and
unraveled the fibers with the point of his knife, fingers working as quickly
and competently as Sarrah the upstairs maid going at the mending. Before
this homely memory could summon any companions, Simon’s attention
was captured again as Binabik began wrapping the threads rapidly around
the base of the dart, weaving them over one another until the butt end was a
soft globe of wool. When it was finished he pushed the whole thing, needle
and wad, into one end of the hollow walking stick. He wrapped the other
needles in their pouch, tucked it in his belt, and handed the rest of the
dismantled staff to Simon.
   “Carry these, if you will please,” he said. “I do not see many birds here,
although quite often they are emerging now for feeding on the insects. It is
perhaps we shall have to be settling for a squirrel—not that they are not
tasting good,” he hastened to explain as they stepped over a fallen tree, “but
there is a certain more delicate touch and experience in the hunting of small
birds. When the dart hits, you will be understanding. I think it is their flying
that touches me so, and how quickly their tiny hearts are beating.”

                                     •••

   Later, in the leaf-whisper of the spring evening, as Simon and the little
troll lazed by the fire digesting their meal—two pigeons and a fat squirrel—
Simon thought on what Binabik had said. It was strange to realize how little
you understood someone that you had grown to like. How could the troll
feel such affection toward something he was going to kill?
   I certainly don’t feel that way about that bloody woodsman, he thought.
He probably would have killed me as quickly as he would have killed the
Sitha-man.
   But would he have? Would he have taken the axe to Simon? Maybe not:
he had thought the Sitha a demon. He had turned his back on Simon,
something he would not have done had he feared him.
   I wonder if he had a wife? Simon suddenly thought. Did he have
children? But he was a wicked man! Still, bad men can have children—King
Elias has a daughter. Would she feel bad if her father died? I certainly
wouldn’t. And I don’t feel bad that the woodsman is dead—but I would feel
sad for his family if they found him dead in the forest that way. I hope he
didn’t have any family, that he was alone, that he lived all alone in the
forest by himself . . . alone in the forest. . . .
   Simon started upright, full of fear. He had nearly drifted off, alone by
himself and helpless . . . but no. There was Binabik sitting back against the
bank, humming to himself. Simon felt suddenly very grateful for the little
man’s presence.
   “Thank you . . . for the supper, Binabik.”
    The troll turned to look at him, an indolent smile tugging at the corners
of his mouth. “It is happily given. Now you have seen what the southern
blow-darts can do, perhaps you would like to learn their using yourself?”
    “Certainly!”
    “Very good. Then I will be showing you tomorrow—perhaps then you
can be hunting our supper, hmm?”
    “How long . . .” Simon found a twig and stirred the embers, “how long
will we be traveling together?”
    The troll closed his eyes and leaned back, scratching his head through his
thick black hair. “Oh, a while at least, I am thinking. You are going to
Naglimund, correct? Well, I have sureness I will travel at least the great part
of the way there. Is that a fair thing?”
    “Yes! . . . ummm, yes.” Simon felt much better. He, too, leaned back,
wiggling his unshod toes before the coals.
    “However,” Binabik said beside him, “I am still not understanding why
you are wishing to go there. I am hearing reports that the Naglimund
stronghold is being garrisoned for war. I am hearing rumors that Josua the
prince—whose disappearing became known even in the remote places of
my travels—may be hiding there to make war on his brother the king. Do
you not know these sayings? Why, if I may so presume, are you going
there?”
    Simon’s moment of nonchalance evaporated. He’s just small, he chided
himself, not stupid! He forced himself to breathe deeply several times
before answering. “I don’t know much about these things, Binabik. My
parents are dead, and . . . and I have a friend at Naglimund . . . a harper.” All
true, more or less—but convincing?
    “Hmmmm.” Binabik had not opened his eyes. “There are perhaps better
destinations than a fortress in caparison for a sieging. Still, you show quite
the bravery for setting out alone, although, ‘Brave and Foolish often live in
the same cave,’ as we say. Perhaps if your destination proves not likable to
you, you may come and be living with we Qanuc. It is a great, towering
troll you would be!” Binabik laughed, a high, silly giggle like a scolding
squirrel. Simon, despite a certain rawness of nerves, could not help but join
in.

                                      •••
   The fire had burned down to a dull glow, and the surrounding forest was
an indeterminate, undistinguished clump of darkness. Simon had pulled his
cloak tightly about him. Binabik was absently running his fingers across the
holes of his flute as he stared up into the velvety patch of sky visible
through a gap in the trees.
   “Look!” he said, extending his instrument to point up into the night. “Do
you see?”
   Simon tilted his head closer to the little man’s. Nothing was in view
above but a thin train of stars. “I don’t see anything.”
   “Don’t you see the Net?”
   “What net?”
   Binabik looked strangely at him. “Are they teaching you nothing in that
boxy castle? Mezumiiru’s Net.”
   “Who’s that?”
   “Aha.” Binabik let his head fall back. “The stars. That drift that you are
seeing above you there: it is Mezumiiru’s Net. They say that she spreads it
to catch her husband Isiki, who has run away. We Qanuc call her Sedda, the
Dark Mother.”
   Simon stared up at the dim points; it looked as though the thick black
fabric separating Osten Ard from some world of light was wearing thin. If
he squinted he could make out a certain fan shape to the arrangement.
   “They’re so faint.”
   “The sky is not clear, you are right. It is said that Mezumiiru prefers it
that way, that otherwise the bright light that the jewels of her net are making
warns Isiki away. Still, there are often cloudy nights, and she is not catching
him yet . . .”
   Simon squinted. “Mezza . . . Mezo . . .”
   “Mezumiiru. Mezumiiru the Moon Woman.”
   “But you said that your people call her . . . Sedda?”
   “That is right. She is the mother of all, as the Qanuc believe.”
   Simon thought for a moment. “Then why do you call that”—he pointed
up—“‘Mezumiiru’s Net.’ Why not ‘Sedda’s Net’?”
   Binabik smiled and lifted his eyebrows. “A good question. My people do
call it that—or, actually, they are saying ‘Sedda’s Blanket.’ I travel more,
however, and am learning other names, and, after all is said, it is the Sithi
who were here first. It is the Sithi who were long ago naming all the stars.”
   The troll sat for a moment, staring with Simon up at the black roof of the
world. “I know it,” he said suddenly. “I will go to singing you the song of
Sedda—or a little part, perhaps. It is song of great length, after all. Should I
assay this singing?”
   “Yes!” Simon snuggled himself even deeper in his cloak. “Sing, please!”
   Qantaqa, who had been snoring softly across the troll’s legs, now woke
up, raising her head to look this way and that, giving a low growl. Binabik,
too, stared around, narrowing his eyes as he tried to pierce the gloom
outside the campfire. A moment later Qantaqa, apparently satisfied that all
was well, poked Binabik into a more pleasing configuration with her huge
head, then settled back down and closed her eyes. Binabik patted her, took
up his flute, and blew several preparatory notes.
   “Be understanding,” he said, “that this can only be a shortness of the
whole song. I will be explaining things. Sedda’s husband, by the Sithi
named Isiki, my people are calling Kikkasut. He is the Lord of all
Birds . . .”
   Solemnly, the troll began to chant in a high-pitched voice—strangely
tuneful, like wind in a high place. He paused at the end of each line to pipe
skirling notes on his flute.

               “Water is flowing
               By Tohug’s cave
               Shining sky-cave
               Sedda is spinning
               Sky-lord’s dark daughter
               Pale, black-haired Sedda.

               Bird-king is flying
               On the star path
               Gleaming bright path
               Now he sees Sedda
               Kikkasut sees her
               Vows she’ll be his.

               ‘Give me your daughter.
               Your daughter who spins.
               Spins slender thread.’
               Kikkasut calls then.
               ‘I’ll clothe her finely
               All in bright feathers!’

               Tohuq he listens
               Hears these fine words
               Rich bird-king’s words
               Thinks of the honor—
               Sedda he’ll give up
               Old, greedy Tohuq.”

   “So,” Binabik explained in his speaking voice, “old Tohuq the sky-lord is
selling his daughter to Kikkasut for a beautiful cape of feathers, which he
will use to make the clouds. Sedda is then going with her new husband to
his country beyond the mountains, where she is becoming the Queen of
Birds. But the marriage has not much happiness. Soon Kikkasut, he begins
to ignore her, coming home only to eat and curse at Sedda.” The troll
laughed quietly, wiping the end of his flute on his fur collar. “Oh, Simon,
this is always being such a length of story . . . Well, Sedda goes to a wise
woman, who tells that she could gain back Kikkasut’s wandering heart if
she will be giving him children.
   “With a charm the wise woman has given, made from bones and
mockfoil and black snow, Sedda is able to then conceive, and she gives
birth to nine children. Kikkasut is hearing, and sends word that he is coming
to take them from her, so that it is properly raised as birds they will be, and
not by Sedda raised as useless moon-children.
   “When she is hearing this, Sedda takes the two most young and hides
them. Kikkasut comes for taking away the others, and he asks of her the
happenstances of the missing two. Sedda tells him they had become sick
and dead. He goes away from her, and she curses him.”
   Again he sang.

               “Kikkasut winging
               Sedda she weeps
               Weeps for her lost
               Her children all taken
               But for the hidden pair
               Lingit and Yana.

               Sky-lord’s grandchildren
               Moon-woman’s twins
               Secret and pale
               Yana and Lingit
               Hid from their father
               Deathless she’ll keep them . . .”

   “You are seeing,” Binabik interrupted himself, “Sedda did not want her
children to have mortalness and be dying, as the birds and the beasts of the
fields. They were her all and onlyness . . .

               “Sedda is mourning
               Lone and betrayed
               Vengeance she plots
               Takes her bright jewels
               Kikkasut’s love gift
               Weaves them together.

               Mountain-top lofty
               Dark Sedda climbs
               Blanket new-woven
               She spreads on night’s sky
               A trap for her husband
               Thief of her children . . .”

   Binabik trilled a melody for a while, wagging his head slowly from side
to side. At last he put the flute down. “It is a song of strenuous length,
Simon, but it speaks of most important things. It goes on to tell of the
children Lingit and Yana, and their choosing between the Death of the
Moon and the Death of the Bird—the moon, you are seeing, dies, but then
has return as itself. The birds die, but leave their egged young to survive
them. Yana, we trolls think, chose the way of the Moon-death, and was
being the matriarch—a word meaning grandmother—the matriarch of the
Sithi. The mortals, myself and yourself, Simon-friend, are of the descent of
Lingit. But it is a long, very long song . . . would you like to be hearing
more some time?”
   Simon made no reply. The song of the moon and the gentle brush of
night’s feathered wing had sent him swiftly down to sleep.