
               The Blood of Saint Hoderund




It seemed that every time Simon opened his mouth to speak, or even to
breathe deeply, it was immediately filled with leaves. No matter how often
he bobbed and ducked, he could not avoid the branches that seemed to grab
for his face like the greedy hands of children.
    “Binabik!” he wailed, “why can’t we go back to the road? I’m being torn
to pieces!”
    “Do not complain so much. We will soon be returning toward the road.”
    It was infuriating to watch the tiny troll threading his way between the
tangling twigs and branches. Easy for him to say “don’t complain!” The
denser the forest got the more slippery Binabik seemed to become,
slithering gracefully through the thick, clutching underbrush while Simon
crashed on behind. Even Qantaqa bounded lightly along, leaving barely a
ripple in the foliage behind her. Simon felt as though half of Oldheart must
be clinging to him in the form of broken twigs and scratching thorns.
    “But why are we doing this? Surely it wouldn’t take any longer to follow
the road around the edge of the forest than it’s taking me to burrow through
it inch by inch!?”
    Binabik whistled for the wolf, who was momentarily out of sight. She
soon loped back into view, and as the troll waited for Simon to catch up he
ruffled the thick collar of fur around her neck.
    “You are most correct, Simon,” he said as the youth dragged up. “It is
just as good time we might be making the longer way about. But,” he held
up a stubby, admonitory finger, “there are other considerations.”
   Simon knew he was supposed to ask. He didn’t, but stood panting beside
the small man and inspected the most recent of his lacerations. When the
troll realized Simon would not rise to the bait, he smiled.
   “‘Why?’, you are asking curiously? What ‘considerations’? The answer
is being all around, up every tree and beneath all rocks. Feel! Smell!”
   Simon stared miserably around him. All he could see were trees. And
brambles. And even more trees. He groaned.
   “No, no, is it no senses you have left at all?” Binabik cried. “What
manner of teachings did you have in that lumpish stone anthill, that . . .
castle!?”
   Simon looked up, “I never said I lived in a castle.”
   “It is having great obviousness in all your actions.” Binabik turned
quickly around to face the barely-visible deer trail they had been following.
“You see,” he said in a dramatic voice, “the land is a book that you should
be reading. Every small thing,”—a cocky grin—“is having a story to tell.
Trees, leafs, mosses and stones, all have written on them things of
wonderful interest . . .”
   “Oh, Elysia, no,” Simon moaned and sank to the ground, dropping his
head forward to rest on his knees. “Please don’t read me the book of the
forest right this moment, Binabik. My feet ache and my head hurts.”
   Binabik leaned forward until his round face was inches from Simon’s.
After a moment’s scrutiny of the youth’s bramble-matted hair the troll
straightened up again.
   “I suppose we may quietly rest,” he said, trying to hide his
disappointment. “I will tell you of these things in a later moment.”
   “Thank you,” Simon mumbled into his knees.

                                     •••

   Simon avoided the task of hunting for supper that night by the simple
expedient of falling asleep the moment they made camp. Binabik only
shrugged, took a long draught from his water bag and a similar one from his
wineskin, then made a short walking tour of the area, Qantaqa sniffing
sentry at his side. After an undistinguished but filling meal of dried meat, he
cast the knucklebones to the accompaniment of Simon’s deep breathing. On
the first pass he turned up Wingless Bird, Fish-Spear, and The Shadowed
Path. Unsettled, he closed his eyes and hummed a tuneless tune for a while
as the sound of night-insects slowly rose about him. When he threw again,
the first two had changed to Torch at the Cave-Mouth and Balking Ram, but
The Shadowed Path turned up again, the bones propped against each other
like the leavings of some fastidious carnivore. Not the sort to follow the
bones to hasty decisions—his master had taught him too well—Binabik
nonetheless slept, when he finally could, with his staff and bag cradled
close.




   When Simon awakened, the troll presented him with a satisfying meal of
roasted eggs—quail, he said—some berries, and even the pale orange buds
of a flowering tree, which proved quite edible and rather sweet in an odd,
chewy way. The morning’s walking also went considerably easier than the
previous day’s: the country was gradually becoming more open, the trees
more distantly spaced.
   The troll had been rather quiet all morning. Simon felt sure that his
disinterest in Binabik’s woodlore was the reason. As they were coming
down a long, gentle slope, the sun high in its morning climb, he felt driven
to say something.
   “Binabik, do you want to tell me about the book of the forest today?”
   His companion smiled, but it was a smaller, tighter grin than Simon was
used to seeing. “Of course, friend Simon, but I am afraid I have given you a
wrong thinking. You see, when I am speaking of the land as a book, I am
not suggesting you should be reading it to improve your spiritual well-
feeling, like a religious tome—although paying attention to your
surroundings for that reason is certainly possible. No, I am speaking of it
more as a book of physic, something one learns for the sake of health.”
   It is truly amazing, Simon thought, how easy it is for this little fellow to
confuse me. And without trying!
   Aloud, he said, “Health? Book of physic?”
   Binabik’s face took on a sudden look of seriousness. “For your living or
dying, Simon. You are not in your home, now. You are not in my home,
although I am undoubtedly being an easier guest than you here. Even the
Sithi, for all the ages they have watched the sun as it is rolling around and
around the skies, even they do not claim Aldheorte as theirs.” Binabik
stopped, and laid his hand on Simon’s wrist, then squeezed. “This place
where we stand, this great forest, is the oldest place. That is why it is called,
as your people say, Aldheorte: it is always the old heart of Osten Ard. Even
these trees of younger age,” he poked with his stick on all sides, “were
pitting themselves against flooding, wind, and fire before your great King
John was first drawing baby-breath on the Warinsten Island.”
   Simon looked around, blinking.
   “Others,” Binabik continued, “others there are, some that I have seen,
whose roots are growing into the very rock of Time; older they are than all
the kingdoms of Man and Sithi that were thrown up in glory and were then
crumbling in obscurity.”
   Binabik squeezed his wrist again, and Simon, looking down the slope
into the vast bowl of trees, felt suddenly small: infinitesimal, like an insect
crawling up the sheer side of a cloud-lancing mountain.
   “Why . . . why are you saying these things to me?” he asked at last,
sucking breath and fighting back something that felt like tears.
   “Because,” said Binabik, reaching up and patting his arm, “because you
must not think that the forest, the wide world, is anything like the alleyways
and such of Erchester. You must watch, and you must be thinking and
thinking.”
   A moment later the troll was off again. Simon stumbled after him. What
had brought all this on? Now the crowding trees seemed a hostile,
whispering throng. He felt like he had been slapped.
   “Wait!” he called. “Thinking about what?” But Binabik did not slow
down or turn.
   “Come now,” he called over his shoulder. His voice was even but curt.
“We must be making better time. With luck we will reach the Knock before
darkness is falling.” He whistled for Qantaqa. “Please, Simon,” he said.
   And those were his last words for the morning.
   “There!” Binabik finally broke his silence. The pair stood atop a ridge,
the treetops a humped blanket of green below. “The Knock.”
   Two more strands of trees were stair-stepped below them, and beyond
these a sloping ocean of grass stretched out to the hills, which stood
profiled by the afternoon sun. “That is Wealdhelm, or at least its foothills.”
The troll pointed with his staff. The shadowed, silhouetted hills, rounded
like the backs of sleeping animals, seemed only a stone’s toss away across
the expanse of green.
   “How far are they . . . the hills?” Simon asked. “And how did we get so
high up? I don’t remember climbing.”
   “Climbing we did not do, Simon. The Knock is a dipping-down place,
sunken low like someone has been pushing at it. If you could be looking
backward,” he waved back up the ridge, “you would see that where we now
stand, we are a little lower than the Erchester Plain. And, to give your
second question answering, the hills are being quite some far ways, but
your sight is deceiving you to make them close. In truth, we had better be at
climbing if we wish to make my stopping-place with sun still on us.”
   The troll trotted a few paces along the ridge. “Simon,” he said, and as he
turned the boy could see some of the tightness had left his jaw and mouth,
“I must tell you that even though those Wealdhelm Hills are babies only
compared to my Mintahoq, still to be near high places again will be . . . like
wine.”
   Suddenly childlike again, Simon thought, watching Binabik’s short legs
carrying him rapidly down the slope between the trees . . . No, he thought
then, not childlike, that’s just the size, but young, very young.
   How old is he, anyway?
   The troll was in fact becoming smaller and smaller even as he watched.
Simon cursed mildly and hurried after him.

                                    •••

   They went fairly quickly down the broad and well-forested ridges, even
though actual climbing was necessary in some places. Simon was not at all
surprised by the dexterity which Binabik could exercise—leaping softly as
a feather, kicking up less dust than a squirrel, showing a sureness of foot
that Simon was sure the rams of Yiqanuc themselves would not scorn.
Binabik’s nimbleness did not surprise him, but his own did. He was
recovering a little from his earlier deprivations, it seemed, and a few good
meals had gone far toward restoring the Simon who had once been known
around the Hayholt as “the ghost-boy,”—the fearless scaler-of-towers and
tumbler-off-of-walls. While no match for his mountain-born companion, he
nevertheless felt he made a good account of himself. It was Qantaqa who
had a few problems, not because she was not surefooted, but instead
because of the few steep downward climbs—childishly easy with handholds
—that were too far to jump. Faced with these situations she growled a little,
sounding more annoyed than upset, and trotted off to find some longer way
down, rejoining them usually within a short time.
   When they finally found a winding deer track down the last hummock,
the afternoon sun had fallen below the middle of the sky, warm on their
necks and bright in their faces. A tepid breeze riffled the leaves but failed to
dry the sweat on their brows. Simon’s cloak, tied around his waist, made
him as middle-heavy as if he had eaten a large meal.
   To his surprise, when they at last reached the upper slopes of the meadow
—the beginnings of the Knock—Binabik elected to bear northeast, hugging
the line of the forest, rather than striking out directly across the whispering,
gently undulating ocean of grass.
   “But the Wealdhelm Road is on the other side of the hills!” Simon said.
“It would be so much faster to . . .”
   Binabik held up a stubby paw, and Simon lapsed into sullen silence.
“There is faster, Simon-friend, and then there is being faster,” he said, and
the cheerful knowingness of his tone almost—but not quite—incited Simon
to say something mocking and childish, but temporarily satisfying. When
he had carefully shut his already opened mouth, Binabik continued. “Do
you see, I thought it might be nice—be a niceness? . . . a nicety?—to take
some respite tonight in a place where you may be sleeping in a bed, and
eating at a table. What are you thinking about that, hmmm?”
   All his resentment boiled away at that, like steam from beneath a raised
pot lid. “A bed? Are we going to an inn?” Recalling Shem’s story of the
Pookah and the Three Wishes, Simon knew how a person felt seeing his
first wish made real . . . until he abruptly remembered the Erkynguard, and
the hanged thief.
   “Not an inn.” Binabik laughed at Simon’s eagerness. “But just as good it
is—no, it is a better thing. It is a place where you are being fed, and rested,
and no one is asking who you are or where you come from.” He pointed out
across the Knock, toward where the far side of the forest bowed back
around until its perimeter at last ended at the base of the Wealdhelm’s
foothills. “Across there, it is, although it cannot be seen from where we are
standing. Come now.”
   But why can’t we walk straight down across the Knock? Simon
wondered. It’s as though Binabik doesn’t want to be so out in the open,
so . . . exposed.
   The troll had indeed taken the northeasterly path, skirting the wide
meadow to travel in Aldheorte’s shadow.
   And what did he mean about a place where no one asks . . . whatever all
that was . . . ? Is he hiding, too?
   “Slow down, Binabik!” he called. At intervals Qantaqa’s white rump
bobbed up from the grass, like a seagull floating on the choppy Kynslagh.
“Slow down!” he called again, hurrying now. The wind caught at his words
and gently carried them away up the rippling slope behind him.
   When Simon had drawn abreast of him at last, the sun on both of their
backs, Binabik reached up and patted his elbow.
   “Earlier I was being very sharp, very abrupt with you. It was not my
place to so speak. Apologies.”‘ He squinted up at the youth, then turned his
eyes ahead to where Qantaqa’s tail was waving above the swaying grass,
now here, now there, the banner of a tiny but swiftly moving army.
   “There is nothing . . .” Simon began, but Binabik interrupted.
   “Please, please, friend Simon,” he said, a note of embarrassment clear in
his voice, “it was not being my place. Say no more.” He lifted both hands
up by his ears and waggled them in a strange gesture. “Rather, let me tell
you something of where we go—Saint Hoderund’s of the Knock.”
   “What is that?”
   “It is the place we will stay. Many times I have been there myself. It is a
retreating place—a ‘monastery’ as you Aedonites say. They are kind to
travelers.”
   This was enough for Simon. Immediately visions of long, high halls,
roasting meat, and clean pallets swarmed through his head—a delirium of
comforts. He began to walk faster, accelerating almost to a trot.
   “Running is not needed,” Binabik admonished him. “It will be waiting
there still, regardless.” He cast a look back at the sun, still several hours
above the western horizon. “Do you want me to tell you of Saint
Hoderund’s? Or are you knowing already?”
   “Tell me,” Simon replied. “I know about such places. Someone I know
stayed at the abbey in Stanshire once.”
   “Well, this is an abbey of specialness. It has a history.”
   Simon raised his eyebrows, willing to listen.
   “A song there is,” Binabik said, “the Lay of Saint Hoderund. It is much
more popular in the south than it is in the north—north, by which I am
saying Rimmersgard, not Yiqanuc my home—and it is obvious why. Are
you knowing anything about the battle of Ach Samrath?”
   “That’s where the northerners, the Rimmersmen, beat the Hernystirmen
and the Sithi.”
   “Oho? Then it was some educating you received after all? Yes, Simon-
friend, it was Ach Samrath that saw the Sithi and Hernystir armies driven
from the field by Fingil Redhand. But there were other, earlier battles, and
one of them was here.” He spread his hand to encompass the waving field
beside them. “This land was differently named, then. The Sithi, who were, I
suppose, those who knew it best, called it Ereb Irigú—Western Gate, that
means.”
   “Who named it the Knock? It’s a funny name.”
   “I do not know with certainty. Myself, I am thinking that the
Rimmersmen’s name for the battle is the root. This place they called Du
Knokkegard—the Boneyard.”
   Simon looked back across the rustling grass, watching as row after row
bowed in turn beneath the footsteps of the wind. “Boneyard?” he asked, and
a chill of premonition ran through him.
   The wind is always moving out here, he thought. Restless—like it’s
looking for something lost . . .
   “Boneyard, yes. There were many underestimations made on both sides
for that battle. These grasses are growing above the graves of many
thousands of men.”
   Thousands, like the lich-yard. Another city of the dead beneath the feet
of the living. Do they know? he suddenly wondered. Do they hear us and
hate us for . . . for being in the sun? Or are they happier being through with
it all?
    I remember when Shem and Ruben had to put down old Rim the plow
horse. Just before Ruben the Bear’s mallet had fallen, Rim had looked up at
Simon—eyes mild but knowing, Simon had thought. Knowing, and yet not
caring.
    Did King John feel that way at last, old as he was? Ready to go to sleep,
like old Rim?
    “And it is a song any harper south of the Frostmarch will sing,” Binabik
said. Simon shook his head and tried to concentrate, but the sighing of the
grass, the drawn whisper of wind, was loud in his ears. “I, and you may be
thanking me for it, will sing no song,” Binabik continued, “but about Saint
Hoderund I should explain, since it is to his house, as it were, we are
going.”
    Boy, troll, and wolf reached the easternmost end of the Knock and turned
again, left sides to the sun. As they waded through the high grass Binabik
pulled off his jacket of hide and knotted the sleeves about his waist. The
shirt that he wore beneath was white wool, loose-woven and baggy.
    “Hoderund,” he began, “was a Rimmersman by birth who, after many
experiences, became converted to the Aedonite religion. Eventually he was
by the church made a priest.
    “As it is said, no single stitch is interesting until the cloak has fallen
apart. We would not have a care what Hoderund did, I am quite sure, had
not King Fingil Redhand and his Rimmersmen crossed the Greenwade
River and for the first time moved themselves into the lands of the Sithi.
    “This, as with most tales of importance, is too long for describing in an
hour of walking. I will avoid those explainings and tell this: the Northmen
had driven all before them, winning for themselves several battles in their
southern movement. The Hernystiri, under their Prince Sinnach, decided to
meet the Rimmersmen here,” Binabik again waved an all encompassing
hand across the breadth of the sun-tipped prairie, “to put a stop to their
onslaught for all and once.
    “All people and Sithi were fleeing from the Knock, fearing to be crushed
between two armies—all were fleeing but Hoderund. Battle, it is seeming,
draws priests like it does flies, and Hoderund it drew. He went to Fingil
Redhand in his tent and then was begging that king to withdraw, so by
sparing the thousands of lives that would be lost. He preached, in his—if I
may say—silliness and bravery to Fingil, telling him of the words of Usires
Aedon to take your enemy to breast and make him brother.
   “Fingil, it is not surprising, thought him a madman, and was much
disgusted to be hearing such words from a fellow Rimmersman . . . Oho, is
that smoke?”
   Catching Simon by surprise with the change of subject—Binabik’s
narrative had lulled him into a sort of sunstruck, walking dream—the troll
pointed up the far side of the Knock. Indeed, from behind a series of gentle
hills, the farthest of which looked to bear the marks of cultivation, a thin
tendril of smoke was rising. “Supper, I am thinking,” Binabik grinned.
Simon’s mouth fell open in anticipatory longing. This time the troll
quickened his steps as well. They turned back toward the sun as the forest’s
dark edge curved around.
   “As told,” the troll resumed, “Fingil was finding Hoderund’s new
Aedonite ideas most offensive. He commanded the priest be executed, but a
merciful soldier instead let him go.
   “But go away Hoderund did not do. When the two armies met at last, he
rushed out onto the battlefield, between directly the Hernystiri and
Rimmersgarders, brandishing his Tree and calling down on to them all the
peace of Usires God. Caught between two angry pagan armies, he was
quickly killed very dead.
   “So,” Binabik waved his stick, beating down a high tussock of grass, “a
story whose philosophy is difficult, hmmm? At least for we Qanuc, who
prefer both being what you call pagan, and being what I call alive. The
Lector in Nabban, however, called Hoderund a martyr, and in the early days
of Erkynland named this place a church and abbey for the Order
Hoderundian.”
   “Was it a terrible battle?” Simon asked.
   “The Rimmersgard men called this place Boneyard. The later battle at
Ach Samrath was perhaps bloodier, but there was treachery there. Here at
the Knock it was breast to breast, sword on sword, and blood running like
the streams of first thaw.”

                                   •••
   The sun, sliding low in the sky, beat full in their faces. The afternoon
breeze, which had sprung up in earnest, bent the long grasses and tossed the
hovering insects so that they danced in the air, tiny flashes of golden light.
Qantaqa came charging back through the field, obliterating in her approach
the sawing, hissing music of stem on stem. As they began to trudge up a
long incline she circled them, waggling her wide head in the air and yipping
excitedly. Simon shielded his eyes, but could see nothing beyond the rise
but the treetops of the forest’s edge. He turned to ask Binabik if they were
almost there, but the troll was staring down as he walked, brows knit in
concentration, paying no heed to Simon or the capering wolf.
   After some time had passed in silence, sullied only by the swish of their
passage through the heavy grass and an occasional agitated bark from
Qantaqa, Simon’s empty stomach steeled him to ask again. He had no
sooner opened his mouth when Binabik astonished him by breaking into
high, keening song.

               “Ai-Ereb Irigú.
               Ka’ai shikisi aruya’a
               Shishei, shishei burusa’eya
               Pikuuru n’dai-tu.”

   As Simon climbed that light-soaked, wind-rippled hill, the words and the
strange tune seemed a lament of birds, a desolate call from the high, lonely,
unforgiving spaces of the air.
   “A Sithi song.” Binabik gave Simon an odd, shy look. “I am not singing
it well. It is about this place, where the first Sithi died at the hands of Man,
where blood was first spilled by the warring of men on the lands of the
Sithi.” As he finished speaking he flapped a hand at Qantaqa, who was
bumping his leg with her broad muzzle. “Hinik aia!” he told her. “She is
smelling people now, and food cooking,” he muttered apologetically.
   “What did the song say?” Simon asked. “The words, I mean.” The
strangeness still chilled him, but at the same moment it reminded him how
big the world truly was, and how little he had seen even in the busy
Hayholt. Small, small, small he felt, smaller than the little troll climbing
beside him.
   “I doubt, Simon, whether the Sithi words can truly be made for singing
in mortal languages—whether their thought is being properly passed on, do
you see? Even worse, it is not the language of my birthplace that we are
speaking, you and I . . . but I can try.”
   They strode on some moments longer. Qantaqa had grown bored at last,
or had thought better of sharing her lupine enthusiasms with these cloddish
humans, and had disappeared over the top of the rise.
   “This, I am thinking, is near in meaning,” Binabik said at last, and then
chanted, rather than sang:

                            “At the Gate of the West
                     Between the sun’s eye and the hearts
                                 Of the ancestors
                                    Falls a tear
                 Track of light, track of earthward-falling light
                    Touches iron and becomes smoke . . .”

   Binabik laughed self-consciously. “Do you see, in the woodcrafty hands
of a troll, the song of air is becoming words of lumpish stone.”
   “No,” Simon said, “I don’t understand it, exactly . . . but it makes me . . .
feel something . . .”
   “That is then good,” Binabik smiled, “but no words of mine can be
matching the Sithi’s own songs, especially this one. It is one of the longest,
I am told, and saddest. It is also said that the Erl-king Iyu’unigato made it
himself, in the last hours before he was killed by . . . by . . . Ah! Look, we
are now at the top!”
   Simon raised his eyes; in truth, they had almost reached the summit of
the long rise, the endless sea of Aldheorte’s huddling treetops stretching
before them.
   But I don’t think he stopped talking because of that, Simon thought. I
think he was about to say something he didn’t want to say. . . .
   “How did you learn to sing Sithi songs, Binabik?” he asked as they
clambered the last few steps to stand on the hill’s wide bask.
   “We will speak of it, Simon,” the troll replied, staring around. “But now,
look! There is the way down to Saint Hoderund’s!”
    Starting barely more than a long stone’s throw beneath them, clinging to
the hill’s sloping side like moss growing on an ancient tree, twined rows
and rows of evenly spaced, carefully tended vines. They were separated one
from the other by horizontal terraces cut into the hillside, edges rounded as
though the soil had been shaped long ago. Paths ran between the vines,
winding down the slope as sinuously as the plants themselves. In the valley
below, sheltered on one side by this first, small cousin of the Wealdhelm
Hills, and on the other by the dark border of the forest, a whole basket-
weave pattern of farming plots could be seen, laid out with the meticulous
symmetry of an illuminated manuscript. Farther along, just visible around
the jut of the hill, were the small outbuildings of the abbey, a rough but
well-tended collection of wooden sheds and a fenced-in field, empty now of
sheep or cows. A gate, the one small moving object in the massive tapestry,
swung slowly back and forth.
    “Follow the paths, Simon, and it is soon we shall be eating, and perhaps
also imbibing a small of the monasterial vintage.” Binabik started down at a
quick walk. Within moments he and Simon were threading their way among
the grapevines while Qantaqa, scornful of the slow traverse of her
companions, sprang down the hillside, leaping over the curling vines
without touching a stake or crushing a single grape beneath her great paws.
    Watching his feet as he hurried down the steep path, feeling his heels
skid a little on every long stride, Simon suddenly felt rather than saw a
presence before him. Thinking that the troll had halted to wait for him, he
looked up with a sour expression, about to say something about showing
some mercy for folk who did not grow up on a mountain. Instead, when his
eyes met the nightmare shape before him, he shouted in fear and lost his
footing, tumbling back onto his rump and sliding two arm’s lengths down
the path.
    Binabik heard him and turned, racing back up the hill to find Simon
sitting in the dirt beneath a large, tattered scarecrow. The little man looked
at the scarecrow, hanging off-center on a wide stake, its crude, painted face
all but wiped away by wind and rain, then looked down to Simon sucking
his scuffed palms in the path. Binabik suppressed his laughter until he had
helped the boy up, grabbing with his small, strong hands at Simon’s elbow
and levering him to his feet, but then could hold back no longer. He turned
and started back down, leaving Simon frowning angrily as the smothered
sounds of the little man’s mirth floated up to him.
   Simon bitterly knocked the worst of the dirt off his breeches and checked
the two packages tucked in his belt, arrow and manuscript, to make sure
neither was damaged. It was obvious Binabik couldn’t know about the thief
hanged at the crossroads, but he had been there to see the Sithi strung up in
the woodsman’s trap. So why should it be so laughable for Simon to be
startled?
   He felt very foolish, but as he looked again at the scarecrow he still felt a
tremor of foreboding. He reached up to it, grasped the hollow sack of a
head—rough and cool to the touch—and folded it over, tucking the top into
the shapeless, tattered cloak that flapped at its shoulders so that the blurry
sightless eyes would be hidden. Let the troll laugh.
   Binabik, composed now, was waiting farther down. He did not apologize,
but patted Simon on the wrist and smiled. Simon returned the smile, but his
was smaller than Binabik’s.
   “When I was here three moons ago,” Binabik said, “on my trip passing
southward, I ate the most wonderful venison! The brothers are permitted to
take a very few deer from the king’s forest for the succoring of wayfarers—
and themselves, it needs no saying. Oho, there it is . . . and smoke is
rising!”

                                     •••

   They had rounded the last curve of the hill; the mournful sound of the
squeaking gate was directly below them. Just ahead and down the slope
were the clustered thatch roofs of the abbey. Smoke was indeed rising, a
thin plume floating up to whirl and dissipate in the wind off the hilltop. But
it was not coming from chimney or smoke hole.
   “Binabik . . .” Simon said, surprise not quite turned to alarm.
   “Burned,” Binabik whispered. “Or burning. Daughter of the
Mountains . . . !” The gate banged shut and immediately popped open
again. “It is a terrible guest who has come to Saint Hoderund’s house.”
   To Simon, who had never seen the abbey before, the smoking waste
below seemed Binabik’s very story of the Boneyard come to life. As in the
terrible, mad hours beneath the castle, he felt the jealous claws of the past
pushing through to drag present time down into a dark place of regret and
fear.
   The chapel, the main abbey, and most of the outbuildings had been
reduced to steaming husks. The charred roof beams, their burdens of wattle
and thatch burned away, lay exposed to the ironic spring sky like the
blackened ribs of a hungry god’s feast. Scattered about the surroundings, as
if dice-thrown by the selfsame god, were the bodies of at least a score of
men, as rag-jointed and lifeless as the scarecrow on the hilltop.
   “Chukku’s Stones . . .” Binabik breathed, still staring, and tapped himself
lightly on the chest with the heel of his hand. He moved forward, pulling
his bag from his shoulder, and hurried down the hill. Qantaqa, vindicated,
barked and capered joyfully.
   “Wait,” Simon said, barely a whisper. “Wait!” he called, and lurched
after, “Come back! What are you doing? You’ll be killed!”
   “Hours old this is!” Binabik called without turning. Simon saw him halt
briefly to lean over the first body he reached. A moment later he trotted on.
   Gasping, heart racing with fear despite the obvious truth of the little
man’s words, Simon looked at the same body as he passed. It was a man in
a black robe, a monk by his appearance—his face was hidden, pressed into
the grass. An arrowhead had pushed violently out through the back of his
neck. Flies walked daintily on the dried blood.
   A few steps later Simon tripped and fell, catching himself painfully with
the palms of his hands on the gravel path. When he saw what he had tripped
over, and saw the flies resettling on the upturned eyes, he was violently,
excruciatingly sick.

                                    •••

   When Binabik found him, Simon had crawled into the shade of a
chestnut tree. The youth’s head nodded bonelessly as Binabik, like a tender
but efficient mother, wiped the bile from his chin with a hank of grass. The
carrion stench was everywhere.
   “Bad it is. Bad.” Binabik touched Simon’s shoulder gently, as if to
reassure himself that the youth was real, then squatted on his haunches,
narrowing his eyes against the last red rays of sunshine. “I can find no one
that is living here. Monks for the greatest part, all dressed in abbey robes,
but there are others, too.”
   “Others . . . ?” It was a gurgle.
   “Men in traveler’s clothes . . . Frostmarch men, stopping here for a night
perhaps, although there is a goodish quantity of them. Several are wearing
beards, and to me have the looking of Rimmersmen. It is a puzzlement.”
   “Where’s Qantaqa?” Simon asked weakly. He found himself strangely
worried for the wolf, although she of all of them was probably least in
danger.
   “Running. Smelling. She is very excited.” Binabik, Simon noticed, had
his stick pulled apart, and had tucked the knife section into his belt. “I
wonder,” the troll said, staring at the rising smoke as Simon finally sat up,
“what was bringing this on? Bandits? A kind of battling for religious
matters—I hear that is not uncommon with you Aedonites—or what? Most
curious . . .”
   “Binabik . . .” Simon hawked and spat. His mouth tasted like a pig-
keeper’s boots. “I’m frightened.” Somewhere in the distance Qantaqa
barked, a surprisingly high-pitched sound.
   “Frightened.” Binabik’s smile was thin as twine. “Frightened is what you
should be.” Though his face appeared clear and unworried, a kind of
stunned defenselessness lurked behind the troll’s eyes. That scared Simon
more than had anything else. There was something more: a hint of
resignation, as if the awful thing had not been entirely unexpected.
   “I am thinking . . .” Binabik began, when Qantaqa’s yipping suddenly
rose into a snarling crescendo. The troll sprang to his feet. “She has found
something,” he said, and pulled the startled youth to his feet with a strong
tug on the wrist. “Or something finds her . . .” With Simon staggering
behind him, impulses of flight and fear twittering through his skull like
bats, Binabik dug away in the direction of the sounds. As he ran, he reached
his finger into his blowpipe to push something into place. Simon knew—a
heavy, forbidding realization—that this dart was black-tipped.
   They ran across the abbey grounds, away from the wreckage and through
the orchard, following the sounds of Qantaqa’s distress. A blizzard of apple
blossoms fell all around; the wind prodded and pushed along the edge of the
forest.
   Less than ten running steps into the wood they saw Qantaqa, hackles
upraised, her growl so deep that Simon could feel it in his stomach. She had
caught a monk, and had backed him against a poplar trunk. The man held
his pectoral Tree on high, as if to call heavenly lightning down on the
offending beast. Despite his heroic stance, the sick pallor of his face and his
trembling arm showed that he expected no lightning to come. His pop-eyes,
exaggerated by fear, were fixed on Qantaqa: he had not yet seen the two
newcomers.
   “. . . Aedonis Fiyellis extulanin mei . . .” His wide lips worked
convulsively; the shadows of leaves mottled his pink skull.
   “Qantaqa!” Binabik shouted, “Sosa!” Qantaqa growled, but her ears
twitched. “Sosa aia!” The troll whacked his hollow stick against his thigh.
The crack echoed. With a last hacking snarl Qantaqa dropped her head and
trotted back toward Binabik. The monk, staring at Simon and the troll as
though they were quite as terrifying as the wolf, swayed slightly and then
toppled backward to land sitting on the ground with the stunned expression
of a child who has hurt himself but has not yet realized that he wants to cry.
   “Usires the merciful,” he gabbled at last as the pair hurried toward him,
“Usires the merciful, the merciful . . .” A wild look came into his bulging
eyes. “Leave me alone, you pagan monsters!” he shouted, and tried to
struggle to his feet. “Murdering bastards, pagan bastards!” His heel skidded
from beneath him and he sat down again, mumbling. “A troll, a murdering
troll . . .” He began to pinken, his color coming back. He sucked in a great
convulsive breath, then looked as if at last he truly would cry.
   Binabik stopped. Grabbing Qantaqa by the neck, he gestured Simon
forward, saying: “Help him.”
   Simon walked slowly, trying with some difficulty to compose his face
into something befitting a friend coming to help—his own heart, after all,
was drumming at his ribcage like a woodpecker. “It’s all well, now,” he
said, “all well.”
   The monk had covered his face with his sleeve. “Killed them all, now
you want us, too,” he cried, his voice, though muffled, sounding more of
self-pity than fear.
   “A Rimmersman, he is,” said Binabik, “as if you would not be guessing
already to hear him at slandering the Qanuc. Pfah.” The troll made a
disgusted noise. “Help him up, friend Simon, and let us take him out into
the light.”
    Simon got the man’s bony, black-robed elbow and laboriously steered
him onto his feet, but when he tried to guide him toward Binabik the man
pulled away.
    “What are you doing?!” he shouted, feeling on his chest for his Tree.
“Making me desert the others? No, you just get away from me!”
    “Others?” Simon turned questioningly to Binabik. The troll shrugged and
scratched the wolf’s ears. Qantaqa seemed to grin as if the spectacle amused
her.
    “Are there others alive?” the boy asked gently. “We will help you, and
them, too, if we can. I am Simon, and that is my friend Binabik.” The monk
stared at him suspiciously. “I believe you met Qantaqa already,” Simon
added, and immediately felt sorry for the poor joke. “Come, who are you?
Where are these others?”
    The monk, whose composure was beginning to return, gave him a long,
mistrustful look, then turned to stare briefly at troll and wolf. When he
turned back to Simon, some of the tension had left his face.
    “If you are indeed . . . a good Aedonite acting in charity, then I ask your
forgiveness.” The monk’s tone was stiff, as in one unused to apologizing. “I
am Brother Hengfisk. Does that wolf . . .” he turned his gaze sideways,
“does he accompany you?”
    “She does,” Binabik said sternly before Simon could answer. “Too bad it
is that she frightened you, Rimmersman, but you must notice that she did
you no harm.”
    Hengfisk did not reply to Binabik. “I have left my two charges for too
long a time,” he told Simon. “I must go to them now.”
    “We’ll come with you,” Simon replied. “Perhaps Binabik can help. He is
very gifted with herbs and things.”
    The Rimmersman briefly raised his eyebrows, which made his eyes seem
to bulge all the more. His smile was bitter. “It is a kind thought, boy, but I
am afraid Brother Langrian and Brother Dochais are not going to be helped
by any . . . woodland poultices.” He turned on his heel and struck off, rather
unsteadily, into the deeper forest.
    “But wait!” called Simon. “What happened to the abbey?”
    “I do not know,” Hengfisk said without turning, “I was not here.”
   Simon looked to Binabik for help, but the troll made no immediate move
to follow. Instead, he called after the limping monk.
   “Oh, Brother Hangfish?”
   The monk whirled, furious. “My name is Hengfisk, troll!” Simon noted
how quickly color came to his face.
   “I was merely making translation for my friend,” Binabik grinned his
yellow grin, “who is not speaking the language of Rimmersgard. You say
you are not knowing what happened. Where were you when your brethren
were being so very slaughtered?”
   The monk seemed about to spit back a reply, but instead reached his hand
up to his Tree and clutched it. A moment later, in a quieter voice, he said:
“Come, then, and see. I have no secrets from you, troll, or from my God.”
He stalked away.
   “Why were you making him mad, Binabik?” Simon whispered. “Haven’t
enough bad things happened here already?”
   Binabik’s eyes were slits, but he had not lost his grin. “Perhaps I am
being unkind, Simon, but you heard his speaking. You have been seeing his
eyes. Do not let yourself be fooled by the wearing of a holy robe. We Qanuc
have wakened too many times in the night, finding eyes like this Hengfisk’s
looking down on us, and torches and axes close by. Your Usires Aedon has
not burned with success that hatred from his northern heart.” With a cluck
for Qantaqa to follow, the troll moved after the stiff-backed priest.
   “But, listen to you!” Simon said, holding Binabik’s eye. “You’re full of
hatred, too.”
   “Ah.” The troll lifted a finger before his now-expressionless face. “But I
am not claiming to believe in your—forgive the saying—upside-down God
of Mercy.”
   Simon took a breath to say something, then thought better of it.

                                    •••

    Brother Hengfisk turned once, silently taking notice of their presence. He
did not speak again for some time. The light that filtered through the leaves
was fast diminishing; within a short time his angular, black-robed form was
little more than a moving shadow before them. Simon was startled when he
turned and said: “Here.” He led them around the base of a great fallen tree
whose exposed roots resembled more than anything else a huge broom—a
broom that would have fired the imagination of Rachel the Dragon toward
heroic, legendary feats of sweeping.
   Simon’s wry thought of Rachel, coupled with the day’s events, brought
on a pang of homesickness so intense that he stumbled, catching himself
with a hand against the scaly bark of the fallen tree. Hengfisk was kneeling,
throwing branches into a small fire that glowed in a shallow pit. Lying
beside the fire, one on either side in the shelter of the tree’s toppled length,
were two men.
   “This is Langrian,” Brother Hengfisk said, indicating the one on the
right, whose face was largely obscured by a bloody bandage made of
sacking. “I found him, the only one alive at the abbey when I returned. I
think Aedon will take him back soon.” Even in the fading light Simon could
see that Brother Langrian’s skin, that which showed, was pale and waxy.
Hengfisk threw another stick on the fire as Binabik, without meeting the
Rimmersman’s eyes once, kneeled down beside the injured man and began
to gently examine him.
   “That one is Dochais,” Hengfisk said, gesturing to the other man, who
lay as limply as Langrian, but without visible injury. “It was him I went out
to find when he did not come back from his vigil. When I brought Dochais
back—carried him—” there was bitter pride in Hengfisk’s tone, “I returned
to find . . . to find all dead.” He made the sign of the Tree on his breast. “All
but Langrian.”
   Simon moved close to Brother Dochais, a thin, young man with a long
nose and the blue chin-stubble of the Hernystiri. “What happened to him?
What’s wrong?”
   “I do not know, boy,” Hengfisk said. “He is mad. He has caught up some
fever of the brain.” He returned to his search for firewood.
   Simon watched Dochais for a moment, noting the man’s labored
breathing and the slight trembling of his thin eyelids. As he turned to look
over to Binabik, who was delicately unwinding the bandage around
Langrian’s head, a white hand came up like a snake from the black robe
before him and caught his shirt-front in a horrifically powerful grip.
   Dochais, eyes still shut, had stiffened, his back so bowed that his waist
rose from the ground. His head was thrown back, and snapped from side to
side.
   “Binabik!” Simon shouted in terror, “he’s . . . he’s . . .”
   “Aaaahhhh!” The voice that pushed up from Dochais’ straining throat
was harsh with pain. “The black wagon! See, it is coming for me!” He
thrashed again, like a landed fish, and his words brought Simon a thrill of
reawakening horror.
   The hilltop . . . I remember something . . . and the creak of black
wheels . . . oh, Morgenes, what am I doing here?!
   A moment later, while Binabik and Hengfisk stared in amazement from
the far side of the fire pit, Dochais had pulled Simon forward until the
youth’s face was almost touching the Hernystirman’s own fear-stretched
features.
   “They are taking me back!” the monk hissed, “—back to . . . back to . . .
that terrible place!” Shockingly, his eyes popped open and stared blindly
into Simon’s own, a handsbreadth away. Simon could not struggle out of
the monk’s grip, even though Binabik was now at his side trying to help
pull him free.
   “You know!” Dochais cried, “you know who it is! You have been
marked! Marked like I was! I saw them as they passed—the white foxes!
They walked in my dream! The white foxes! Their master has sent them to
put ice on our hearts, and take away our souls on their black, black wagon!”
   And then Simon was loose, gasping and sobbing. Binabik and Hengfisk
held the twitching monk until he finally stopped thrashing. The silence of
the black forest returned, surrounding the tiny campfire as the gulfs of night
embrace a dying star.