
                   The Shadow of the Wheel




He was standing on the open plain at the center of a vast, shallow bowl
of grass, a speck of pale upright life in the midst of an endless riot of green.
Simon had never felt quite so exposed, so naked to the sky. The fields
sloped up and away from him; the horizon on all sides made a tight seal of
grass and stone-gray sky.
    After a span that could have been moments or years in such impersonal,
fixed timelessness, the horizon was breached.
    With the ponderous creak of a ship of war under heavy wind, a dark
object appeared above the rim that was the outermost limit of Simon’s view.
It rose and rose, impossibly tall, until its shadow fell across Simon at the
valley’s depth—the shadow’s impact was so sudden that it seemed almost to
resound as it struck, a deep, reverberating hum that shook Simon’s bones.
    The great bulk of the thing came clear against the sky as it stood for a
long moment poised on the valley’s edge. It was a wheel, a huge black
wheel as tall as a tower. Sunk in the twilight of its shadow, Simon could
only gape as it began to turn with excruciating deliberateness, to slowly roll
down the long green slope, spouting flayed gouges of sod behind it. Simon
stood frozen in its awful path as it ground on, as inexorable as the
millstones of Hell.
    Now it was over him, rim foremost, a black trunk stretching to the
firmament, raining turf down all round. The ground beneath Simon’s feet
pitched forward as the weight of the wheel tipped the bed of the earth. He
stumbled, and as he found his balance the black rim was upon him. As he
stared, mute and horrified, a gray shadow passed before his eyes, a gray
shadow with a flashing core . . . a sparrow, flying madly past, with some
bright thing caught up in its curling grip. He flicked his eyes to follow, and
then, as if it had somehow caught at his heart in its swift passage, he flung
himself after it, out of reach of the plunging wheel . . .
   But even as he dove, and the wall-wide rim smashed down, Simon’s
pants leg was snagged by a burning cold nail protruding from the great
wheel’s outer edge. The sparrow, only inches away, fluttered free, spiraling
up gray on gray against the slate sky like a moth, its glinting burden
disappearing with it into the twilight. A great voice spoke.
   You have been marked.
   The wheel took Simon and tumbled him, shook him like a hound
breaking a rat’s neck. Then it rolled on, yanking him high up into the air.
Dangling, he was pulled skyward, the ground rocking and pitching beneath
his head like a pulsing green sea. The wind of the wheel’s passage was all
around him as he rose, circling toward the apex; the blood sang in his ears.
   Scrabbling with his hands in the grass and mud that clotted the broad
rim, Simon pulled himself painfully upright, riding the wheel as though it
were the back of some cloud-tall beast. He rose ever nearer to the arching
sky.
   He reached the top, and for a moment sat perched at the world’s summit.
All the spreading fields of Osten Ard were visible beyond the rim of the
valley. The sunlight lanced through the dim sky to touch on the battlements
of a castle, and onto a beautiful shining spire, the only thing in the world
that seemed as tall as the black wheel. He blinked, seeing something
familiar in its sweeping line, but even as it began to come clear the wheel
ground on, pushing him over the top, then pulling him swiftly toward the
ground so far below.
   He struggled with the nail, ripping at his pants leg to work himself loose,
but somehow he and the nail became one; he could not break free. The
ground leaped up. The two, Simon and the virgin green earth, were rushing
together with a noise like the horns of the final day booming through the
valley. He struck—the two came together—and the wind and the light and
the music blew away like a candle flame.
   Suddenly:
                                   •••

   Simon was in darkness, deep in earth which parted before him like water.
There were voices around him, slow halting voices that issued from mouths
full of choking dirt.
   Who enters our house?
   Who comes to disturb our sleep, our long sleep?
   They will steal from us! The thieves will take from us our quiet and our
dark beds. They will drag us up again through the Bright Gate . . .
   As the mournful voices cried Simon felt hands clutch at him, hands as
cold and dry as bone, or as wet and soft as burrowing roots, stretching,
twining fingers reaching out to catch him up to empty breasts . . . but they
could not stop him. The wheel rolled, rolled, grinding him downward, ever
farther, until the voices died behind him and he was sliding through gelid,
silent darkness.
   Darkness . . .
   Where are you, boy? Are you dreaming? I can almost touch you. It was
Pryrates’ voice that suddenly spoke, and he felt the malevolent weight of
the alchemist’s thoughts behind it. I know now who you are—Morgenes’
boy, a scullion, a meddler. You have seen things you should not have seen,
kitchen boy—trifled with things beyond you. You know far too much. I will
search you out.
   Where are you?
   And then there was a greater darkness, a shadow beneath the shadow of
the wheel, and deep in that shadow two red fires bloomed, eyes that must
have gazed from a skull horribly full of flame.
   No, mortal, a voice said, and in his head it had the sound of ashes and
earth, and the mute, unvoiced end of things. No, this is not for you. The
eyes flared, full of curiosity and glee. We will take this one, priest.
   Simon felt Pryrates’ hold slipping away, the alchemist’s power withering
before the dark thing.
   Welcome, it said. This is the Storm King’s house, here beyond the Darkest
Gate . . .
   What . . . is . . . your . . . name?
   And the eyes fell in, like crumbling embers, and the emptiness behind
them burned colder than ice, hotter than any fire . . . and darker than any
shadow. . . .
    “No!” Simon thought he shouted, but his mouth, too, was full of earth.
“I won’t tell you!”
    Perhaps we will give you a name . . . you must have a name, little fly,
little dust speck . . . so that we will know you when we meet . . . you must be
marked . . .
    “No!” He tried to struggle free, but the weight of a thousand years of
earth and stone were upon him. “I don’t want a name! I don’t want a name!
I don’t . . .”
    “. . . want a name from you!” Even as his last cry echoed out through the
trees, Binabik was crouching over him, a look of real concern etched on his
face. The weak morning sunlight, sourceless and directionless, filled the
glade.
    “A madman, and one near death I have already to nurse,” Binabik said as
Simon sat up, “and now you must start shouting in your sleep as well?” He
wanted it to be a joke, but the morning was too cold and thin to support the
attempt. Simon was shivering.
    “Oh, Binabik, I . . .” He felt a trembling, sickly smile come to his face,
forced out by the simple fact of being in the light, of being on top of the
ground. “I had a terrible, terrible dream.”
    “I am not very surprised,” the troll said, and squeezed Simon’s shoulder.
“A terrible day yesterday would not by chance alone lead to less-than-
restful sleeping.” The little man straightened up. “If you like, be free to find
something to eat in my bag. I am attending the two monks.” He pointed to
the dark shapes on the far side of the campfire. The nearer one, who Simon
guessed was Langrian, was wrapped in a dark green cloak.
    “Where is . . .” Simon remembered the name after a few moments,
“. . . Hengfisk?” His head was pounding, and his jaw throbbed as though he
had been cracking nuts with his teeth.
    “The unpleasant Rimmersman—who, in fairness it is necessary to say,
did give his cloak for warming Langrian—is off searching in the wreckage
of his home for food and such things. I must be returning to my wards,
Simon, if you are feeling better.”
    “Oh, certainly. How are they?”
    “Langrian, I have pleasure to say, is much improved.” Binabik gave a
little nod of satisfaction. “He has been sleeping quietly for some long time
—a claim you cannot also be making, hmmm?” The troll smiled. “Brother
Dochais, sadly, is beyond my help, but he is not sick except in his fearful
thoughts. Him I have given something to help sleep also. Now please
forgive, I must look at Brother Langrian’s dressings.”
    Binabik stood and stumped off around the fire pit, stepping over Qantaqa
who lay sleeping near the warm stones, and whose back Simon had
previously taken for another large rock.
    The wind lightly fingered the leaves of the oak tree above his head as
Simon riffled through Binabik’s bag. He pulled out one small sack that felt
as though it might contain breakfast, but even before he opened it a clinking
noise told him it held the strange bones he had seen before. A further search
turned up smoked, dried meat wrapped in a rough cloth, but as soon as he
had the package open he realized that the last thing he wanted to do was put
food of any kind into his churning stomach.
    “Is there any water, Binabik? Where’s your skin?”
    “Better, Simon,” the troll called from his crouch over Brother Langrian.
“A stream there is just a short walk down this way.” He pointed, then
reached down and tossed Simon the skin bag. “Filling this will be a help for
me.”
    As Simon picked up the skin, he saw his twin bundles lying nearby. On
an impulse, he caught up the rag-wrapped manuscript and brought it with
him as he walked down to the stream.
    The streamlet moved sluggishly, and its eddies were clogged with twigs
and leaves. Simon had to clear a space before he could lean down and bring
up handfuls of water to splash his face. He scrubbed hard with his fingers—
it felt as though the smoke and blood of the ruined abbey’s ending had
worked its way into his every pore and wrinkle. Afterward he drank several
great swallows, then filled Binabik’s bag.
    He sat down on the bank, and his mind turned to the dream that had
cloaked his thoughts like a dank mist since he had arisen. Like Brother
Dochais’ wild words of the night before, the dream had raised dreadful
shadows in Simon’s heart, but the daylight was even now melting them
away like unquiet ghosts, leaving only a residue of fear. All he remembered
was the great black wheel as it had borne down upon him. All else was
gone, leaving black, empty spots in his mind, doors of forgetfulness he
could not open.
   Still, he knew that he was caught up in something larger than just the
struggle of royal brothers—greater even than the death of that good old man
Morgenes, or the slaughter of a score of holy men. These were all but
eddies of some larger, deeper current—or, rather, small things crushed by
the heedless turning of a mighty wheel. His mind could not grasp what it all
might mean, and the more he thought, the more elusive such ideas became.
He only understood that he had fallen beneath the wheel’s broad shadow,
and if he were to survive, he must harden himself to its dreadful
revolutions.

                                   •••

   Slumped on the bank, the thin fizz of the insects who hovered over the
stream filling the air, Simon unwrapped the pages of Morgenes’ life of
Prester John and began to leaf through it. He had not looked at it in some
time, due to long marching and early bedtime once camp was made. He
pulled apart some of the pages where they had stuck to each other, reading a
sentence here, a handful of words there, not caring so much what it said as
indulging in the comforting memory of his friend. Staring at the script, he
remembered the old man’s slender, blue-veined hands, nimble and clever as
nest-building birds.
   A passage caught his eye. It was on a page following a crude, hand-
drawn map that the doctor had titled at the bottom: “The Battle-field at
Nearulagh.” The sketch itself was of little interest, as for some reason the
old man had not bothered to label any of the armies or landmarks, nor had
he included an explanatory caption. The subsequent text, however, leaped
out at him, an answer of a sort to thoughts that had been plaguing him since
the awful discovery of the day before.

     “Neither War nor Violent Death,” Morgenes had written, “have
  anything uplifting about them, yet they are the candle to which
  Humanity flies again and again, as complacently as the lowly moth.
  He who has been upon a battlefield, and who is not blinded by
  popular conceptions, will confirm that on this ground Mankind seems
  to have created a Hell on Earth out of sheer impatience, rather than
  waiting for that original to which—if the priests are correct—most of
  us will eventually be ushered.
     “Still, it is the field of war that determines those things that God
  has forgotten—accidentally or not, what mortal can know?—to order
  and arrange. Hence, it is often the arbiter of Divine Will, and Violent
  Death is its Law Scribe.”

   Simon smiled, and drank a little water. He remembered very well
Morgenes’ habit of comparing things to other things, like people to bugs,
and Death to a wrinkly old archive-priest. Usually these comparisons had
been beyond Simon, but sometimes, as he strained to follow the twists and
turns of the old man’s thoughts, a meaning had come clear all of a sudden,
like a curtain drawn from in front of a sunny window.

     “John Presbyter,” the doctor had also written, “was without doubt
  one of the greatest warriors of the age, and without that ability would
  never have risen to his final, royal state. But it was not his battling
  that made him a great king; rather it was his use of the tools of
  kingship that battling brought into his hands, his statecraft and his
  example to the common people.
     “In fact, his greatest strengths on the field of combat were his worst
  failings as High King. In the pitch of battle he was a fearless,
  laughing killer, a man who destroyed the lives of those who came
  against him with the cheerful enjoyment of an Utanyeat hedge-baron
  arrow-feathering a buck deer.
     “As a king he was sometimes prone to quick action and
  heedlessness, and it was in that way he very nearly lost the Battle of
  Elvritshalla Dale, and did lose the good will of the conquered
  Rimmersgarders.”

   Simon frowned as he traced along the passage. He could feel sunlight
slipping down through the trees to heat the back of his neck. He knew he
really should get the water skin back to Binabik . . . but it had been so long
since he had sat quietly by himself, and he was most curiously surprised to
read Morgenes apparently speaking ill of the golden, indomitable Prester
John, a man who figured in so many songs and stories that only the name of
Usires Aedon was better known in all the world, and that not by a long
measure.

     “By contrast,” the passage continued, “the one man who was
  John’s match on the field of war was his virtual opposite. Camaris-sá-
  Vinitta, last prince of the Nabbanai royal house, and brother of the
  current duke, was a man to whom war seemed only another fleshly
  distraction. Astride his horse Atarin, and with the great sword Thorn
  in his hand, he was probably the most deadly man in our world—yet
  he took no pleasure from battle, and his great skill was only a burden,
  in that his mighty reputation brought many against him who would
  otherwise have had no cause, and forced him to kill when he would
  not.
     “It is said in the book of the Aedon that when the priests of Yuvenis
  came to arrest Holy Usires he went willingly, but when they purposed
  to take also His acolytes Sutrines and Granis, Usires Aedon would not
  have it, and slew the priests with a touch of His hand. He wept at the
  slaying, and blessed their bodies.
     “So it was with Camaris, if so sacrilegious a comparison can be
  made. If anyone approached the terrible power and universal love
  which Mother Church imputes to Usires, Camaris was that one, a
  warrior who killed with no hatred for his enemies, and yet was the
  most terrifying fighter of this, or probably any other . . .”

  “Simon! Will you please come quickly! I need water, and I am needing it
now!”
  The sound of Binabik’s voice, harsh with urgency, made Simon jump
guiltily. He scrambled up the bank toward the camp.
  But Camaris was a great fighter! All the songs described him laughing
heartily as he hewed the heads from the wild men of the Thrithings.
  Shem used to sing one, how did it go . . . ?

              “. . . He gave them the left side
              He gave them the right side.
              He shouted and he sang
              As they ran and showed their backside.
              Camaris came a-laughing
              Camaris came a-fighting
              Camaris came a-riding
              Through the Battle of the Thrithings . . .”

   As he emerged from the brush Simon saw in the bright sunlight—how
had the sun gotten so high?—that Hengfisk had returned, and that he and
Binabik were crouching over the supine form of Brother Langrian.
   “Here, Binabik.” Simon handed the skin bag to the kneeling troll.
   “It was a fine long time you were . . .” Binabik began, then broke off,
shaking the water bag. “Half full?” he said, and the look on his face made
Simon blush with shame.
   “I had just drunk some when you called,” he offered. Hengfisk turned a
reptilian eye on him and scowled.
   “Well,” Binabik said, returning to Langrian, who looked much rosier
than Simon remembered, “‘Climbed is climbed, fallen is fallen.’ I think our
friend here is to be improving.” He lifted the bag and squirted a few drops
of water into Langrian’s mouth. The unconscious monk coughed and
sputtered for a moment, then his throat moved convulsively as he
swallowed.
   “Do you see?” Binabik asked proudly, “it is the wound on the head that I
believe I am . . .”
   Before Binabik could finish his explanation, Langrian’s eyes fluttered
open. Simon heard Hengfisk suck in a sharp breath. Langrian’s gaze
wandered blearily over the faces that hovered above him, then his eyes fell
shut again.
   “More water, troll,” hissed Hengfisk.
   “What am I doing here is what I know, Rimmersman,” Binabik replied
with icy dignity. “You were already performing your duty when you pulled
him from the ruins. Now I am at performing mine, and need no
suggestions.” As he spoke the little man trickled water past Langrian’s
cracked lips. After some moments the monk’s thirst-swollen tongue pushed
out of his mouth like a bear coming up from a winter’s sleep. Binabik
moistened it with the bag, then dampened a cloth and draped it across
Langrian’s forehead, which was traced with healing cuts.
   Finally he opened his eyes again, and seemed to focus on Hengfisk. The
Rimmersman took Langrian’s hand in his.
   “Heh . . . Hen . . .” Langrian croaked. Hengfisk pressed the damp cloth
against the skin.
   “Don’t speak, Langrian. Rest.”
   Langrian turned his eyes slowly from Hengfisk to Binabik and Simon,
then back to the monk. “Others . . . ?” he managed to say.
   “Rest, now. You must rest.”
   “This man and I are agreeing at last on something.” Binabik smiled at his
patient. “You should take sleep.”
   Langrian appeared to want to speak more, but before he could his eyelids
slid down, as if heeding advice, and he slept.




   Two things happened that afternoon. The first occurred while Simon, the
monk, and the troll were eating a sparse meal. Since Binabik had not
wanted to leave Langrian there was no fresh game; the trio made do with
dried meat and the products of Simon’s and Hengfisk’s foraging, berries
and a few greenish nuts.
   As they sat, chewing silently, each wrapped in his own very different
thoughts—Simon’s an equal mixture of the horrid dream-wheel and the
triumphant battlefield figures of John and Camaris—Brother Dochais
suddenly died.
   One moment he was sitting quietly, awake but not eating—he had
refused the berries Simon offered him, staring like a mistrustful animal until
the boy took them away—and a moment later he had rolled over on his
face, quivering at first and then pitching violently. By the time the others
could turn him over his eyes had rolled up, showing a ghastly white in his
dirt-smeared face; a moment later he had quit breathing, although his body
remained as rigid as a spar. Shaken as he was, Simon was certain that just
before the final passion he had heard Dochais whisper “Storm King.” The
words burned in his ears and troubled his heart, although he did not know
why, unless he had heard them in his dream. Neither Binabik nor the monk
said anything, but Simon was sure they had both heard.
   Hengfisk, to Simon’s surprise, wept bitterly over the body. He himself, in
some strange way, felt almost relieved, a bizarre emotion that he could
neither understand nor quell. Binabik was as unreadable as stone.

                                      •••

   The second thing happened as Binabik and Hengfisk were arguing, an
hour or so later.
   “. . . And I am agreeing we will help, but you are upon the wrong ledge if
you think to order me.” Binabik’s anger was tightly controlled, but his eyes
had narrowed to black slashes beneath his brows.
   “But you will only help bury Dochais! Would you leave the others to be
food for wolves?” Hengfisk’s anger was not at all controlled, and his eyes
pushed out, wide and staring in his reddening face.
   “I tried to help Dochais,” the troll snapped. “I failed. We will bury him, if
that is what you wish. But it is not my plan to be spending three days to
bury all of your dead brethren. And there are worse purposes they could
serve than ‘food for wolves’—and perhaps did while living, some of them!”
   It took a moment for Hengfisk to work out Binabik’s tangled speech, but
when he did his color grew even brighter, if such was possible.
   “You . . . you heathen monster! How can you speak ill of unburied dead,
you . . . poisonous dwarf!”
   Binabik smiled, a flat, deadly smile. “If your God loves them so, then he
has taken their . . . souls, yes? . . . up to Heaven, and to be lying around will
do harm only to their mortal bodies. . . .”
   Before another word could be spoken, both combatants were startled out
of their dispute by a deep growl from Qantaqa, who had been napping on
the far side of the fire pit, beside Langrian. In a moment it became clear
what had startled the gray wolf.
   Langrian was talking.
   “Someone . . . someone warn the . . . the abbot . . . treachery! . . .” The
monk’s voice was a harsh whisper.
   “Brother!” Hengfisk cried, limping quickly to his side. “Save your
strength!”
   “Let him speak,” Binabik replied. “It might be saving our lives,
Rimmersman.”
   Before Hengfisk could respond, Langrian’s eyes were open. Staring first
at Hengfisk, then at his surroundings, the monk shuddered as though with a
chill, despite being wrapped in a heavy cloak.
   “Hengfisk . . .” he grated, “. . . the others . . . are they . . . ?”
   “All dead,” said Binabik plainly.
   The Rimmersman shot him a hateful glance. “Usires has taken them
back, Langrian,” he said. “Only you were spared.”
   “I . . . I feared it . . .”
   “Can you tell us what happened?” The troll leaned forward and put
another damp cloth on the monk’s forehead. Simon could see now for the
first time, behind the blood and scars and sickness, that Brother Langrian
was quite young, perhaps not yet twenty years of age. “Do not tire yourself
too much,” Binabik added, “but tell us what you know.”
   Langrian closed his eyes again, as if falling back into sleep, but he was
only marshaling his strength. “There were . . . a dozen or so men who
came . . . came in, sheltering from . . . off the Road.” He licked his lips;
Binabik brought the water bag. “Many large . . . parties are traveling these
days. We gave them to eat, and Brother Scenesefa . . . put them up in
Traveler’s Hall.”
   As he drank water and talked, the monk seemed to slowly gain strength.
“They were a strange lot . . . didn’t come down to the main hall that night,
except the leader—a pale-eyed man who bore . . . an evil-looking helm . . .
and dark armor—he asked . . . asked if we had heard word of a party of
Rimmersmen coming North . . . from Erchester. . . .”
   “Rimmersmen?” said Hengfisk, frowning.
   Erchester? thought Simon, wracking his brain. Who could it be?
   “Abbot Quincines told the man we had heard of no such party . . . and he
seemed . . . satisfied. The abbot seemed troubled, but of course he did not
share his worry with . . . we younger brothers. . . .
   “The next morning one of the brothers came in from the hill-fields to
report a company of riders from the south . . . the strangers seemed . . . very
interested, saying that it was . . . the rest of their original party come to meet
them. Their pale-eyed leader . . . took his men out to the great courtyard, to
greet the new arrivals—or so we thought. . . .
   “Just as the new company had crested Vine Hill and been sighted from
the abbey—they looked to be only a . . . head or two fewer than our current
guests. . . .”
   Here Langrian had to stop for a moment’s rest, panting slightly. Binabik
would have given him something to make him sleep, but the injured monk
waved away the troll’s offer.
   “Not much . . . more to tell. One of the other brothers . . . saw one of the
guests come running out, late, from Traveler’s Hall. He had not finished
donning his cloak—they were all cloaked, ‘though the morning was warm
—and beneath it there was the flash of a sword blade. The brother ran to the
abbot, who had feared something of the like. Quincines went to confront the
leader. Meanwhile, we could see the men riding down the hill—
Rimmersmen all, bearded and braided. The abbot told the leader he and his
men must put up, that Saint Hoderund’s would not be the site of some
bandit struggle. The leader pulled his sword out and put it to Quincines’
throat.”
   “Merciful Aedon,” breathed Hengfisk.
   “A moment later we heard hoofbeats. Brother Scenesefa suddenly ran to
the courtyard gate and shouted a warning to the approaching strangers. One
of the . . . ‘guests’ . . . put an arrow in his back, and the leader slit the
abbot’s throat.”
   Hengfisk stifled a sob and made the sign of the Tree over his heart, but
Langrian’s face was solemn, emotionless; he continued his narrative
without pausing.
   “Then there was carnage, the strangers leaping onto the brothers with
knife and sword, or pulling bows and arrows from places of hiding. When
the new arrivals came through the gate it was with their own swords
drawn . . . I suppose they heard Scenesefa’s warning, and saw him shot
down in the gateway arch.
   “I do not know what happened then, for all was madness. Someone threw
a torch upon the chapel roof, and it caught afire. I ran for water as people
screamed and horses screamed and . . . and something hit me on the head.
That is all.”
   “So you do not know who was in either of these two warring bands?”
Binabik asked. “Did they fight with each other, or were they being
partners?”
   Langrian nodded seriously. “They fought. The ambushers had a much
more difficult time with them than they did with unarmed monks. That is all
I can say—all I know.”
   “May they burn!” hissed Brother Hengfisk.
   “They shall.” Langrian sighed. “I think I must sleep again.” He closed
his eyes, but his breathing did not change.
   Binabik straightened up. “I think I will be walking a short ways,” he said.
Simon nodded. “Ninit, Qantaqa,” he called, and the wolf leaped up,
stretched, and followed him. He had vanished into the woods within
moments, leaving Simon with the three monks, two living, one dead.

                                    •••

   The services for Dochais were brief and spare. Hengfisk had found a
winding sheet in the ruins of the abbey. They wrapped it around Dochais’
thin body and lowered him into a hole the three able-bodied folk had dug in
the abbey’s cemetery, while Langrian slept in the forest with Qantaqa for a
guardian. The digging had been hard work—the fire in the great barn had
burned the wooden handles from the shovels, leaving only the blades to be
wielded by hand—straining, sweaty work. By the time Brother Hengfisk
had completed his impassioned prayers, coupling them with promises of
divine justice—seeming to forget in his fervor that Dochais had been far
away from the abbey when the murderers had done their work—it was the
darkling tag-end of afternoon. The sun had dropped until there was nothing
left but a bright residue along the crest of Vine Hill, and the grass of the
churchyard was dark and cool. Binabik and Simon left Hengfisk crouching
at the graveside, goggle-eyes tightly shut in prayer, and went to forage and
explore around the abbey lands.
   Although the troll was careful to avoid as much as possible of the scene
of the tragedy, its results were so widespread that Simon quickly began to
wish he had returned to the forest camp to wait with Langrian and Qantaqa.
A second hot day had done nothing to improve the condition of the bodies:
in their bloated, swollen pinkness Simon saw an unpleasant similarity to the
roast pig that crowned the Lady Day table at home. A part of him was
scornful of his weakheartedness—hadn’t he already seen violent death, a
battlefield-full in a few short weeks?—but he realized as he walked . . .
trying to keep his eyes ahead, to avoid the sight of other eyes, glazed and
cracked by the sun . . . that death, at least for him, was never the same, no
matter how veteran an observer he had become. Each one of these ruined
sacks of bone and sweetbreads had been a life once, a beating heart, a voice
that complained or laughed or sang.
    Someday this will happen to me, he thought as they threaded their way
around the side of the chapel,—and who will remember me? He could find
no ready answer, and the sight of the tiny field of grave markers, their
tidiness cruelly lampooned by the sprawled bodies of slain monks, offered
him little comfort.
    Binabik had found the charred remnants of the chapel’s side door, areas
of sound wood showing through the coal-black surface like streaks of new-
cleaned brass on an old lamp. The troll poked at the door, knocking loose
burned fragments, but the structure held. He gave it a more vigorous poke
with his stick, but still it stuck closed, a sentry who had died on watch.
    “Good,” Binabik said. “It is suggesting we may wander inside without
the whole structure crashing upon our heads.” He took his stick and poked
it in through a fissure between door and frame, then used it like a mason’s
prybar, pushing and levering until, with a little help from Simon, it sprang
open in a shower of black dust.
    After working so hard to open a door, it was truly strange to enter and
find the roof gone, the chapel as open to the air as an unlidded cask. Simon
looked up to see the sky framed above him, going red at the bottom and
gray at the top with the onset of evening. Around the top of the walls the
windows were blackened in their frames, the leading twisted outward,
spilling its sooty glass as though a giant hand had pulled off the roof,
reached down through the beams and poked out each window with a titan
finger.
    A quick survey turned up nothing of use. The chapel, perhaps because of
its rich draperies and hangings, had burned to the walls. Crumbled ash
sculptures of benches and stairs and an altar stood in place, and the stone
altar steps bore the ghost of a floral wreath, a perfect, impossibly delicate
crown of paper-thin leaves and diaphanous gray ash-flowers.
    Next, Simon and Binabik made their way across the commons to the
residences, a long low hall of tiny cells. The damage here was moderate—
one end had caught fire, but for some reason had burned out before the
conflagration had spread.
   “Be looking especially for boots,” Binabik said. “It is sandals these
abbey men wear mostly, but some of them may occasionally need to ride or
travel in cold weather. Some that are fitting you are best, but in necessity
settle for too large rather than too small.”
   They started at opposite ends of the long hall. None of the doors were
locked, but they were distressingly bare little rooms, a Tree on the wall the
only decoration in most. One monk had hung a flowering rowan branch
above his hard pallet; its jauntiness in such spare surroundings cheered
Simon immensely, until he remembered the fate of the room’s resident.
   On the sixth or seventh, Simon was startled when his pulling open the
cell door was followed by a hissing noise and the blur of something
whisking past his ankle. At first he thought an arrow had been shot at him,
but one look at the tiny, empty cell showed the impossibility of such a
thing. A moment later he realized what it was, and quirked his mouth in a
half-smile. One of the monks, no doubt in direct contravention of abbey
rules, had kept a pet—a cat, no less, just like the little gray scattercat he had
befriended at the Hayholt. After two days locked in the cell, waiting for the
master who would not return, it was hungry, angry, and frightened. He went
back down the hall looking for it, but the animal was gone.
   Binabik heard him clomping about. “Is all well, Simon?” he called, out
of sight in one of the other cells.
   “Yes,” Simon yelled back. The light in the tiny windows above his head
was quite gray now. He wondered if he should head back to the door,
finding Binabik on the way, or go back and look some more. He was
interested at least in examining the cell of the monk with the contraband
cat.
   A few moments later Simon was reminded about the problems of
keeping animals shut in too long. Holding his nose, he looked quickly
around the cell, and spotted a book, small but nicely bound in leather. He
tiptoed across the suspect floor, hooked it off the low bed, and stilted out
again.
   He had just sat down in the next cell to have a look at his prize when
Binabik appeared in the doorway.
   “I am having small luck here. You?” the troll asked.
   “No boots.”
   “Well, it is fast becoming evening. I think I should be having a look
around the Traveler’s Hall where the murderous strangers were sleeping, in
case there is some object there that will tell us anything. Wait for me here,
hmmm?”
   Simon nodded and Binabik left.
   The book was, as Simon had expected, a Book of Aedon, although it was
a very expensive and finely-made book for a poor monk to have in his
possession; Simon guessed it was a gift from a rich relative. The volume
itself was unremarkable, although the illuminations were very nice—at least
as far as Simon could tell in the fading light—but there was one thing that
caught his attention.
   On the first page, where people often wrote their names, or words of
salutation if the book was a gift, there was this phrase, carefully but shakily
written:

                Piercing My Hearte there is A Golden Dagger;
                                That is God
               Piercing God’s Hearte there is a Golden Needle;
                                 That is me

   As Simon sat looking at the words his newfound resolve was tested; he
felt a wave wash through him, a staggering ocean breaker of remorse and
fear, and a feeling of things that, though unseen, were nonetheless slipping
heartbreakingly away.
   In the midst of his staring reverie Binabik popped his head through the
door and tossed a pair of boots onto the floor beside him with a muffled
clatter. Simon did not look up.
   “Many interesting things there are at Traveler’s Hall, your new boots not
least. But dark is coming, and I may take only a moment more. Meet with
me before this hall, soon.” And he was gone again.
   After long, silent moments in the troll’s wake, Simon set the book down
—he had planned to take it, but had changed his mind—and tried the boots
on his feet. At other moments he would have been pleased to find how well
they fitted, but now he just left his tattered shoes on the floor and walked
down the hall toward the front entrance.
   The muted light of evening had descended. Across the commons stood
the Traveler’s Hall, a twin to the building he had just left. For some reason
the sight of the door across from him swinging listlessly to and fro filled
him with vague fear. Where was the troll?
   Just as he remembered the swinging paddock gate that had been the first
signal that all was not well at the abbey, Simon was startled by a rough
hand grasping at his shoulder, pulling him backward.
   “Binabik!” he managed to shout, and then a thick palm was clamped
over his mouth, and he was crushed back against a rock-hard body.
   “Vawer es do kunde?” a voice growled at his ear in the stony accents of
Rimmersgard.
   “Im tosdten-grukker!” another voice sneered.
   In a blind panic Simon opened his mouth behind the shielding hand and
bit. There was a grunt of pain, and for a moment his mouth was free.
   “Help me! Binabik!” he screeched, then the hand covered him again,
crushingly painful now, and a second later he felt a black impact behind his
ear.
   He could still hear the echoes of his cry dissipating as the world turned to
water before his eyes. The door of Traveler’s Hall swung, and Binabik did
not come.