
                          Cold Comforts




Duke Isgrimnur of Elvritshalla had put a little too much pressure
on the blade. The knife leaped from the wood and nicked his thumb, freeing
a sudden stripe of blood just below the knuckle. He fumed a curse, dropped
the piece of heartwood to the ground and stuck his thumb in his mouth.
   Frekke is right, he thought,—damn him. I’ll never have the knack of this.
I don’t even know why I try.
   He did know, though: he had convinced old Frekke to show him the
rudiments of carving during his virtual imprisonment at the Hayholt.
Anything, he had reasoned, was preferable to pacing about the castle’s halls
and battlements like a chained bear. The old soldier, who had served the
Duke’s father Isbeorn as well, had patiently shown Isgrimnur how to choose
the wood, how to spy out the natural spirit that lurked inside, and how to
release it, chip by chip, from the prisoning grain. Watching Frekke at work
—his eyes nearly shut, his scarred lip quirked in an unconscious smile—the
demons and fish and lively beasts that climbed into being from beneath his
knife had seemed the inevitable solutions to the questions the world put
forth, questions of randomness and confusion in the shape of a tree limb,
the position of a rock, the vagaries of rain clouds.
   Sucking on his wounded thumb, the duke toyed in a disordered way with
such thoughts—for all Frekke’s claims, Isgrimnur found it damnably hard
to think about anything at all while he was carving: the knife and wood
seemed at odds, in pitched battle that might elude his vigilance at any
moment to slide over into tragedy.
    Like now, he thought, sucking and tasting blood.
    Isgrimnur sheathed his knife and stood up. All around him his men were
hard at work, cleaning a brace of rabbits, tending the fire, getting camp
ready for the evening. He moved toward the blaze, turned, and stood with
his broad backside to the flames. His earlier thought of rainstorms came
back to him as he looked up at the rapidly-graying sky.
    So here it is Maia-month, he mused. And here we are, less than twenty
leagues north of Erchester . . . and where did that storm come from?
    At the time, some three hours gone, Isgrimnur and his band had been in
hot pursuit of the brigands who had waylaid them at the abbey. The Duke
still had no idea who the men had been—some of them had been
countrymen, but none had familiar faces—or why they had done what they
had. Their leader had worn a helmet in the form of a snarling hound’s face,
but Isgrimnur had never heard of such an emblem. He might not have even
survived to wonder, but for the black-robed monk who had screamed a
warning from the St. Hoderund’s gateway just before toppling with an
arrow between his shoulder blades. The fighting had been fierce, but the
monk’s death . . . God’s mercy to him, whoever he was . . . had served
notice, and the Duke’s men had been ready for the attack. They had lost
only young Hove on the initial charge; Einskaldir had been wounded, but
killed his man anyway, and another beside. The enemy had not been
looking for a fair fight, Isgrimnur thought sourly. Faced by Isgrimnur and
his guard, fighting men all and itching for action after months in the castle,
the would-be ambushers had fled across the abbey commons to the stables,
where their horses were apparently saddled and waiting.
    The duke and his men, after a quick inspection found none of the monks
alive to explain what had occurred, had resaddled and followed. It might
have been more politic to stay and bury Hove and the Hoderundans, but
Isgrimnur’s blood had been fired. He wanted to know who, and he wanted
to know why.
    It was not to be, however. The brigands had gotten a start of some ten
minutes on the Rimmersmen, and their horses were fresh. The Duke’s men
had sighted them once, a moving shadow sweeping down off Vine Hill onto
the plain, heading through the low hills toward the Wealdhelm Road. The
sight had filled Isgrimnur’s company with new life, and they had spurred
their horses down the slope into the valleys of the Wealdhelm foothills.
Their mounts seemed to have caught some of their excitement, drawing up
reserves of strength; for a brief while it had seemed that they might run the
waylayers down, coming on them from behind like a vengeful cloud rolling
across the plain.
    Instead, a strange thing had happened. One moment they had been
rolling along in the sunlight, then the world had grown perceptibly darker.
When it did not change, when half a mile later the hills around them were
still lifeless and gray, Isgrimnur had looked up to see a knot of steel-colored
clouds swirling in the sky overhead, a fist of shadow over the sun. A dim,
grumbling crack, and suddenly the sky was spilling rain—a splatter at first,
then torrents.
    “Where did this come from?” Einskaldir had shouted across to him, a
hissing mist now pulled like a curtain between them. Isgrimnur had no idea,
but it had troubled him greatly—he had never seen a storm come up so fast
out of a relatively clear sky. When a moment later one of the men’s horses
had slipped on the wet, matted grass and stumbled, throwing its rider—
who, thank Aedon, landed safely—Isgrimnur raised his voice and bellowed
his troops to a halt.
    So it was that they had elected to make camp, here only a league or so
from the Wealdhelm road. The duke had briefly considered going back to
the abbey, but the men and horses were tired, and the blaze that had been
roaring from the main buildings when they rode off suggested there would
probably be little to go back for. Wounded Einskaldir, however—who,
though Isgrimnur knew better, sometimes seemed to possess no emotions
save a general fierceness—had ridden right back to the abbey for Hove’s
body, and to pick up anything else that might give a clue to the attackers’
identities or motivations. Knowing Einskaldir and his ways, the duke had
given in quickly, stipulating only that he must take Sludig along, who was a
slightly less ardent spirit. Sludig was a fine soldier, but nevertheless valued
his own skin enough to provide some counterweight to bright-burning
Einskaldir.
    So here I stand, Isgrimnur thought in tired disgust, baking my bum in
front of the campfire while the young men do the work. Curse age, curse my
aching back, curse Elias, curse these damnable times! He looked down at
the dirt, then stooped and took up the piece of wood lying there which he
had hoped some miracle would help him shape into a Tree, to lie against his
wife Gutrun’s breast when he returned to her.
  And curse carving! He gave it to the flames.

                                     •••

   He was tossing rabbit bones into the fire, feeling a little better for having
eaten, when there came a sudden roll of hoofbeats. Isgrimnur dropped his
hands to wipe grease on his kirtle, and his liegemen did the same—it would
not do to have a slippery hand on axe or sword. It sounded like a very small
company of riders, two or three at most; still, no one relaxed until
Einskaldir and his white horse came clear against the twilight. Sludig rode
just behind, leading a third mount across whose pommel were draped . . .
two bodies.
   Two bodies, but, as Einskaldir explained in his terse manner, only one a
corpse.

                                     •••

    “A boy,” Einskaldir grunted, his dark beard already shiny with rabbit fat.
“Found him nosing about. Thought we should bring him along.”
    “Why?” Isgrimnur rumbled. “He doesn’t look like anything but a
scavenger.”
    Einskaldir shrugged. Fair-haired Sludig, his companion, grinned affably:
it hadn’t been his idea.
    “No houses around. We saw no boy at the abbey. Where did he come
from?” Einskaldir cut loose another piece with his knife. “When we
grabbed him, he yelled for someone. ‘Bennah,’ or ‘Binnock,’ couldn’t say
for sure.”
    Isgrimnur turned away to briefly survey Hove’s body, now laid out on a
cloak. He was kin, the cousin of his son Isorn’s wife—not close kin, but
close enough by the customs of the cold north that Isgrimnur felt a deep
pang of remorse as he stared down at the young man’s snow-pale face, at
his thin yellow beard.
    From there he turned to the captive, still bound at the wrists, but lowered
from the horse to lie propped against a rock. The boy was only a year or
two younger than Hove, thin but wiry, and the sight of his freckled face and
shock of reddish hair tugged at Isgrimnur’s memory. He could not summon
the reminder forth. The youth was still stunned from the tap Einskaldir had
given him, eyes closed and mouth slack.
   Looks like any poor peasant lout, the duke thought, except for those
boots—which I’ll wager he found at the abbey. Why in the name of Memur’s
Fountain did Einskaldir bring him? What am I supposed to do with him?
Kill him? Keep him? Leave him to starve?
   “Let’s get to finding rocks,” the duke said at last. “Hove will need a cairn
—this looks like wolf country to me.”




   Night had come down; the outcroppings of rock that dotted the desolate
plain below Wealdhelm were only clumps of deeper shadow. The fire had
been stoked high, and the men were listening to Sludig sing a bawdy song.
Isgrimnur knew only too well why men who had been blooded, who had
lost one of their own—Hove’s undistinguished pile of stones was one of the
shadow-clumps out beyond the firelight—might feel the urge to indulge in
such foolishness. As he himself had said months ago, standing across the
table from King Elias, there were frightening rumors on the wind. Here on
the open plain, dwarfed but not protected by the looming hills, things that
were travelers’ tales in the Hayholt or Elvritshalla, ghost-fables to enliven a
dull evening, were no longer so easy to brush aside with a laughing remark.
So the men sang, and their voices made an off-key but very human sound in
the night wilderness.
   And ghost-tales aside, Isgrimnur thought, we were attacked today, and
for no reason I can fathom. They were waiting for us. Waiting! What in the
name of sweet Usires does that mean?!
   It could have been that the brigands were merely waiting for the next
group of travelers who might stop at the abbey—but why? If they were only
after robbing and whatnot, why not pillage the abbey itself, a place likely to
have at least a fine reliquary or two? And why wait for chance travelers at
an abbey in the first place, where there would naturally be witnesses to any
act of thievery?
   Not that we’ve got many witnesses left, damn their eyes. One, maybe if
that boy proves to have seen anything.
   It just did not make good sense. Waiting to waylay a company of
travelers who, even in these times, might prove to be king’s guardsmen—
who had, in fact, turned out to be armed, battle-honed northerners.
   So the possibility had to be entertained that he and his men had been the
targets. Why? And just as importantly, who? Isgrimnur’s enemies, Skali of
Kaldskryke being a prime example, were well known to him, and none of
the bandits had been recognized as members of Skali’s clan. Besides, Skali
was gone back to Kaldskryke long ago, and how could he have known that
Isgrimnur, sick to death of inactivity and fearing for the safety of his duchy,
would decide at last to confront Elias and, after an argument, receive his
reluctant royal permission to take his men north?
   “We need you here, Uncle,” he told me. He knew I had stopped believing
that long ago. Just wanted to keep his eye on me, that’s what I think.
   Still, Elias had not resisted anywhere near as strongly as the duke had
anticipated; the argument had seemed to Isgrimnur only a matter of form, as
though Elias had known the confrontation was coming, and had decided to
accede already.
   Frustrated by the circles his thoughts were following, Isgrimnur was
about to lever himself up and off to his bedroll when Frekke came to him,
the fire at the aged soldier’s back making him a gaunt, shambling shadow.
   “A moment, your Lordship.”
   Isgrimnur suppressed a grin. The old bastard must be drunk. He only got
formal when he was in his cups.
   “Frekke?”
   “It’s that boy, sire, the one Einskaldir brought back. He’s awake. Thought
your Lordship might like to chat with him.” He swayed a little, but quickly
turned it into a gesture of pulling up his breeches.
   “Well, I suppose.” The breeze was up. Isgrimnur pulled his kirtle tighter
and started to turn, then stopped. “Frekke?”
   “Lordship?”
   “I threw another damned carving in the fire.”
   “I ’spected you would, sire.”
   As Frekke wheeled around to head back to the beer jug, Isgrimnur was
positive the old man wore a tiny smile.
  Well, damn him and his wood, anyway.

                                    •••

   The boy was sitting up, chewing the meat from a bone. Einskaldir sat on
a rock beside him looking deceptively relaxed—Isgrimnur had never seen
the man relax. The firelight could not reach Einskaldir’s deep-set stare, but
the boy, when he looked up, was as wide-eyed as a deer surprised at a forest
pond.
   At the duke’s approach the boy stopped chewing and regarded Isgrimnur
suspiciously for a moment, mouth half-open. But then, even by fireglow,
Isgrimnur saw something pass across the boy’s face . . . was it relief?
Isgrimnur was troubled. He had expected, despite Einskaldir’s suspicions—
the man, after all, was as prickly with mistrust as a hedgehog—to find a
frightened peasant boy, terrified or at least dully apprehensive. This one
looked like a peasant, an ignorant cotsman’s son in tattered clothes, covered
in dirt, but there was a certain alertness to his gaze that made the duke
wonder if perhaps Einskaldir hadn’t been right.
   “Here now, boy,” he said gruffly in the Westerling speech, “what were
you doing poking about the abbey?”
   “I think I’m going to slit his throat now,” Einskaldir said in
Rimmerspakk, pleasant tone in horrid contrast to his words. Isgrimnur
scowled, wondering if the man had lost his mind, then realized as the boy
continued to stare blandly up at him that Einskaldir was only probing to
find if the boy spoke their tongue.
   Well, if he does, he’s one of the coolest wits I’ve ever seen, Isgrimnur
thought. No, it beggared imagination to think a boy this age in the camp of
armed strangers could have understood Einskaldir’s chilling words and not
reacted at all.
   “He doesn’t understand,” the duke said to his liegeman in their
Rimmersgard tongue. “But he is a calm one, isn’t he?” Einskaldir grunted
an affirmative and scratched his chin through his dark beard.
   “Now, boy,” the duke resumed, “I asked you once. Speak! What brought
you to the abbey?”
   The youth lowered his eyes and set the bone he had been gnawing on the
ground. Isgrimnur again felt a tug at his memory, but still could summon
nothing.
   “I was . . . I was looking for . . . for some new shoes to wear.” The boy
gestured to his clean, well-cared-for boots. The duke picked him out by his
accent as an Erkynlander, and something more . . . but what?
   “And you found some, I see.” The duke squatted, so that he was at eye
level. “Do you know you can be hanged for stealing from the unburied
dead?”
   Finally, a satisfying reaction! The boy’s heartfelt flinch at the threat
could not have been studied, Isgrimnur felt sure. Good.
   “I’m sorry . . . master. I didn’t mean any harm. I was hungry from
walking, and my feet hurt . . .”
   “Walking from where?” He had it now. The boy spoke too well to be a
woodsman’s brat. He was a priest’s boy, or a shopkeeper’s son, or some
such. He’d run away, no doubt.
   The youth held Isgrimnur’s stare for a moment; again the duke had the
feeling the boy was calculating. A runaway from a seminary, perhaps, or a
monastery? What was he hiding?
   The boy spoke at last. “I . . . I have left my master, sir. My parents . . .
my parents apprenticed me to a chandler. He beat me.”
   “What chandler? Where? Quickly!”
   “Mo . . . Malachias! In Erchester!”
   It makes sense, mostly, the duke decided. Except for two details.
   “What are you doing here, then? What brought you to Saint Hoderund’s?
And who,” Isgrimnur lanced in, now, “is Bennah?”
   “Bennah?”
   Einskaldir, who had been listening with half-closed eyes, leaned forward.
“He knows, Duke,” he said in Rimmerspakk, “he said ‘Bennah’ or
‘Binnock,’ that’s sure.”
   “How about ‘Binnock,’ then?” Isgrimnur dropped a wide hand on the
captive’s shoulder, and felt only a twinge of regret when the boy winced.
   “Binnock . . . ? Oh, Binnock’s . . . my dog sir. Master’s, actually. He ran
away, too.” And the boy actually smiled, a lopsided grin that he quickly
suppressed. Despite his misgivings the old duke found himself liking the
lad.
   “I’m heading for Naglimund, sir,” the boy continued quickly. “I heard the
abbey fed travelers like me. When I saw the . . . the bodies, the dead men, I
was scared—but I needed some boots, sir, I truly did. Those monks were
good Aedonites, sir—they wouldn’t have minded, would they?”
   “Naglimund?” The duke’s eyes narrowed, and he sensed Einskaldir grow
a little more taut, if such a thing was possible, at the boy’s side.
   “Why Naglimund? Why not Stanshire, or Hasu Vale?”
   “I have a friend there.” Behind Isgrimnur Sludig’s voice rose, careening
through a final drunken chorus. The boy made a gesture in the direction of
the fire circle. “He’s a harper, sir. He told me if I ran away from . . .
Malachias, to come to him and he would help me.”
   “A harper? At Naglimund?” Isgrimnur stared intently, but the boy’s face,
though shadowed, was as innocent as cream. Isgrimnur suddenly felt
disgusted with the whole business. Look at me! Questioning a chandler’s
boy as if he had single-handedly led the ambush at the abbey! What a
damnable day it has been!
   Einskaldir was still not satisfied. He bent his face close to the boy’s ear
and asked, in his heavily-accented speech, “What is the Naglimund harper’s
name?”
   The youth turned, alarmed, but seemingly from the sudden proximity of
Einskaldir rather than the question, for a moment later he blithely
responded.
   “Sangfugol.”
   “Frayja’s Paps!” Isgrimnur cursed, and climbed heavily to his feet. “I
know him. That’s enough. I believe you, boy.” Einskaldir had turned away,
pivoting on his rocky seat to watch the men laughing and arguing at the fire.
“You may stay with us, boy, if you like,” the duke said. “We will be
stopping at Naglimund, and thanks to those whoreson bastards we have
Hove’s horse going riderless. This is hard country for a stripling to cross
alone, and these days it’s near as much as slitting your own throat to travel
out of company. Here.” He walked to one of the horses and pulled a saddle
blanket down, tossing it to the youth. “Bed down wherever you like, as long
as it’s close in. Easier for the man standing sentry if we’re not strung out
like a flock of straying sheep.” He stared at the thistledown hair starting out
in all directions, and the bright eyes. “Einskaldir fed you. Do you need
aught?”
   The boy blinked—where had he seen him? In the town, probably. “No,”
the boy replied, “I was just hoping that . . . that Binnock will not get lost
without me.”
   “Trust me, boy. If he doesn’t find you, he’ll find someone else, and that’s
a fact.”
   Einskaldir had already slipped away. Isgrimnur stumped off. The boy
curled himself in the blanket and lay down at the foot of the rock.




   I haven’t really seen the stars for a while, Simon thought as he stared up
from his blanket. The bright points seemed to hang like frozen fireflies. It’s
just not the same looking up through the trees as it is out here in the open—
like being on a tabletop.
   He thought of Sedda’s Blanket, and doing so thought of Binabik.
   I hope he’s safe—then again, it was him who left me to the Rimmersmen.
   It had been a stroke of luck that his captor had turned out to be Duke
Isgrimnur, but still, there had been moments of real terror, waking up in the
camp surrounded by hard-looking, bearded men. He supposed that,
knowing the ill-will between Binabik’s people and the Rimmersmen, he did
not really hold it against the troll for having disappeared—if he had even
known of Simon’s abduction. Still, it hurt to lose a friend that way. He
would have to harden himself: he had begun to depend on the little man to
know what was right, what had to be done, just as he had once listened
raptly to Doctor Morgenes. Well, the lesson was clear: he would be his own
man, keep his own counsel, and make his way.
   In truth, he had not wanted to tell Isgrimnur his true destination, but the
duke was sharp, and Simon had felt several times that the old soldier was
balancing him on the blade of a knife—one false step would have tipped
him over.
   Besides, that dark one who sat beside me all the time, he looked like he
would kill me just like drowning a kitten if it suited him.
   So, he had given the duke all the truth he comfortably could, and it had
worked.
   The question, then, was what to do now. Should he stay with the
Rimmersmen? It would seem foolish not to, but still . . . Simon was not yet
totally sure of where the duke stood. Isgrimnur was going to Naglimund,
but what if it was to arrest Josua? Everybody at the Hayholt was forever
talking about how loyal Isgrimnur had been to old King John, how he held
the High King’s Ward more sacred than his own life. Where did he fit in
with Elias? Under no circumstances did Simon intend to tell what part he
had played in Josua’s departure from the Hayholt, but things had a way of
slipping out, sometimes. Simon was dying to hear some news of the castle,
of what had happened after Morgenes’ last gambit—had Pryrates lived?
Inch? What had Elias told the people had happened?—but it was exactly
those kind of questions, no matter how guilefully asked, that could drop
him into boiling water.
   He was too wound up to sleep. As he stared up at the scattered stars, he
thought of the bones he had seen Binabik cast that morning. The wind
brushed his face, and suddenly the stars themselves were bones—a wild
array strewn across the dark field of the sky. It was lonely out here among
strangers, under the limitless night. He longed for his homely bed in the
servant’s quarters, for the days when none of these things had happened.
His longing was like the piercing music of Binabik’s flute: a cool pain that
was nevertheless the only thing he could cling to in the wide, wild world.

                                    •••

   He had dozed a little, but when the noise awakened him, heart thumping,
the stars still burned deep in the blackness. A momentary panic constricted
his throat as a dark shape loomed over him, impossibly tall. Where was the
moon?
   It was only the man on watch, he saw an instant later, stopping for a
moment with his back to Simon’s blanket. The sentry had his own saddle
blanket, and had wrapped it high on his shoulders, the dome of his
unhelmeted head poking up through the folds.
   The watchman wandered past without looking down. He had an axe
tucked in his broad belt, a wickedly sharp, heavy weapon. He also carried a
spear longer than he was tall; as he paced, the butt end dragged in the dirt.
   Simon pulled the blanket closer, huddling himself against the sharp wind
that was moving across the plain. The sky had changed: where before it had
been clear, the stars picked out in brilliant detail against its unfathomable
blackness, now it was sullied by streamers of clouds, milky tendrils
reaching out like fingers from the north. At the far side of the sky they had
covered the lowest stars like sand poured over the coals of a fire.
   Maybe Sedda will catch her husband tonight, Simon thought sleepily.

                                     •••

   The second time he awoke it was to a splash of water in his eyes and
nose. He opened his eyes, gasping, to see the stars had been snuffed above
him as neatly as a top closing on a jewel chest. It was raining, the clouds
now directly overhead. Simon grunted, wiping water from his face, and
turned on his side, pulling the blanket up to make a hood for his head. He
could see the sentry again, a little farther away now, shielding his face and
staring up into the rain.
   Simon’s eyes were just drifting closed when the man made an odd
grunting noise and dropped his head to look down. Something in the man’s
stance, something that suggested that though he stood rock-still he was
nevertheless struggling, made Simon open his eyes wider. The rain began to
sheet down, and thunder growled distantly. Simon strained to see the sentry
through the boiling downpour. The man was still standing in the same
place, but something was moving now at his feet, something active that had
pulled free from the general blackness. Simon sat up, and the raindrops
pounded and splashed on the ground all about.
   A flash of lightning abruptly lit the night, making the rocks glare forth
like painted wooden props from a Usires Play. Everything in the camp came
clear—the steaming remains of the fire, the huddled, sleeping forms of the
Rimmersmen—but what leaped to Simon’s eye in that split instant was the
sentry, whose face was stretched in a hideous, silent mask of absolute terror.
   Thunder crashed, and then the sky was smeared with lightning again.
The ground around the sentry was seething, gouting up in great sprays of
dirt. Simon’s heart lurched in his breast as the man fell to his knees. The
thunder cannoned again; lightning flared three times in succession. The
earth continued to fountain up, but now there were hands everywhere, and
long thin arms, glinting slickly in the rain as they crawled up the body of
the kneeling man, pulling him down, face forward into the black soil. The
sky-glare caught a greater surge of movement as a horde of dark things
pushed up from the earth, thin, ragged things with waving arms, staring
white eyes, and—horribly revealed as the lightning leaped across the sky
and the rain hissed down—matted whiskers and tattered clothes. As the
thunder died out Simon shouted, choking on water, then shouted again.
   It was worse than any vision of Hell. The Rimmersmen, startled awake
by Simon’s terrified cry, were beset from all sides by hopping, flailing
bodies. The things were boiling up from the ground like rats—indeed, as
they scrambled through the camp the night was filled with thin, mewling
squeals that rang of tunnels and blindness and cowardly malice.
   One of the northerners was on his feet, the creatures swarming over him.
They were none of them as tall as Binabik, but their numbers were
prodigious, and even as the northerner unsheathed his sword they pulled
him down. Simon thought he saw the flash of sharp things in their hands,
rising and falling.
   “Vaer! Vaer Bukkan!” one of the Rimmersmen shouted from the other
side of the camp. The men were up now, and in the intermittent flashes
Simon could see the pale fire of their swords and axes. Kicking away the
blanket, he climbed to his feet, searching desperately for a weapon. The
things were everywhere, prancing on their thin legs like insects, calling out,
shrieking thinly when the axe of a Rimmersman bit. Their cries almost
sounded like a language, and that, in the midst of nightmare, was one of the
most horrible things of all.
   Simon ducked behind the rock that had sheltered him, circling around as
he looked frantically for something to protect himself with. A figure hurtled
toward him, tumbling to the ground only a pace away—one of the
northerners, half of his face a wet ruin. Simon bolted forward to pull the axe
from his convulsive grasp; not yet dead, the man gurgled as Simon dragged
the weapon free. A moment later Simon felt a bony clutch at his knee, and
whirled to see a hideous little manlike face behind the grasping claw, eyes
staring whitely. He swung the axe down at the face, as hard as he could, and
felt a crunch like a beetle ground underfoot. The stiff fingers fell away, and
Simon leaped free, gagging.
   With the light from the sky alternately blooming and dying, it was nearly
impossible to tell what was happening. The swaying figures of the
Rimmersmen stood all around, but there was a far greater number of
hopping, piping demons. It seemed that the best place to . . .
   Simon was knocked to the ground without warning, a gripping paw
around his neck. He felt the side of his face go down into the mud, tasted it,
then heaved up against the thing on his back. A crude blade whickered past
his eyes and stuck with a sucking noise in the earth. Simon clambered to his
knees, but another hand reached around his face, covering his eyes. It stank
of mud and foul water, the fingers squirming like nightcrawlers.
   Where is the axe? I’ve dropped the axe!
   He clambered shakily to his feet, legs wide on the slippery ground, and
tried to pry loose the clamping fingers around his windpipe. He stumbled
forward, nearly falling again, unable to dislodge the awful, strangling thing
from his back. The bony hand was cutting off his air, the sharp knees
digging at his ribs; he thought he heard the ropy thing squealing in triumph.
He managed a few more steps before he dropped to his knees, the din of
battle growing fainter behind him. His ears roared; strength flowed out of
his arms and body like meal from a torn sack.
   I’m dying . . . was all he could think. Before his eyes there was nothing
but dull red light.
   Then the crushing, scratching grip on his throat was suddenly gone.
Simon fell heavily on his chest and face and lay gasping.
   Wheezing, he looked up. Painted against the black sky by a sheet of
crackling lighting was a mad silhouette . . . a man on a wolf.
   Binabik!
   Sucking air into his ragged throat, Simon tried to pull himself upright,
but could get no farther than his elbows before the little man was at his side.
A pace away the body of the earth-creature lay curled like a singed spider,
blind eyes to the sky.
   “Say nothing!” Binabik hissed. “We must go! Quickly!” He helped
Simon to a sitting position, but the boy waved him away, batting at the little
man with baby-weak hands.
   “Have to . . . have to . . .” Simon wagged a shaking hand toward the
chaos that raged around the campsite, some twenty paces away.
   “Ridiculous!” Binabik snapped. “The Rimmersmen can fight their own
battles. My duty is to get you to safety. Now come!”
   “No,” Simon said stubbornly. Binabik held his hollowed stick in his
hand; Simon knew what had felled his attacker. “We ha—have to he—help
them.”
   “They will survive.” Binabik was grim. Qantaqa had followed her
master, and now sniffed solicitously at Simon’s wound. “You are my
charge.”
   “What do you . . .” Simon began. Qantaqa growled, a deep, threatening
sound of alarm; Binabik looked up. “Daughter of the Mountains!” he
groaned. Simon followed his gaze.
   A clot of the greater darkness had broken off from the swirling melee and
was rapidly moving toward them. It was hard to tell how many creatures
might be in the bounding tangle of arms and eyes, but it was more than a
few.
   “Nihut, Qantaqa!” Binabik shouted; an instant later the wolf sprang
toward them; they squealed in whistling terror as she struck.
   “We have no more time to waste, Simon,” the troll snapped. Thunder
caromed across the plain as he pulled his knife from his belt and dragged
Simon up. “The duke’s men are holding their own, now, and I have no way
to afford your being killed in the last struggling.”
   In the midst of the earth-burrowers Qantaqa was a gray-furred engine of
death. As her great jaws bit, and she shook and bit again, thin black bodies
hurtled away on all sides to fall in broken heaps. More were swarming over,
and the wolf’s buzzing snarl rose above the storm’s rumble.
   “But . . . but . . .” Simon held back as Binabik moved toward his mount.
   “It was my bound promise to protect you,” Binabik said, tugging Simon
along. “That was Doctor Morgenes’ wish.”
   “Doctor . . . !? You know Doctor Morgenes . . . !?”
   As Simon stared, mouth working, Binabik stopped and whistled twice.
Qantaqa, with a last ecstatic shiver, flung two of the creatures aside and
bounded toward them.
   “Now, run, foolish boy!” Binabik shouted. They ran—Qantaqa first,
leaping like a hart, her muzzle black with blood, Binabik after. Simon
followed, tripping and staggering across the muddy plain as the storm
shouted unanswerable questions.