
                    A Wind from the North




“No, I don’t want a damned thing!” Guthwulf, Earl of Utanyeat spat
citril juice on the tile floor as the wide-eyed page went scurrying away.
Watching him go, Guthwulf regretted his hasty words—not out of any
sympathy for the boy, but because he had suddenly realized that he might
indeed want something. He had been nearly an hour waiting outside the
throne room without a drop of anything to drink, and only Aedon Himself
knew how much longer he might sit here rotting.
   He spat again, the pungent citril stinging his tongue and lips, and cursed
as he wiped a line of spittle off his long jaw. Unlike many of the men in his
command, Guthwulf was not accustomed to having a piece of the bitter
southern root always tucked in his cheek, but during this strange, damp
spring—one that had found him confined for days at a time in the Hayholt,
waiting on the king’s bidding—he had found that any distraction, even that
of burning one’s palate, was welcome.
   Also, and undoubtedly because of the wet weather, the halls of the
Hayholt seemed to reek of mold, mold and . . . no, corruption was too
melodramatic a word. Anyway, the strongly aromatic citril seemed to help.
   Just as Guthwulf had climbed to his feet, deserting the stool to resume
the frustrated pacing that had occupied most of his waiting time, the throne
room door creaked and swung inward. Pryrates’ blunt head appeared in the
gap, black eyes flat and shiny as a lizard’s.
   “Ah, good Utanyeat!” Pryrates showed his teeth. “How long we have
kept you waiting! The king is ready to see you now.” The priest pulled the
door farther in, revealing his scarlet robe and a glimpse of the high hall
behind. “Please,” he said.
   Guthwulf had to pass very close to Pryrates as he entered, sucking in his
chest to minimize the contact. Why was the man standing so close? Was it
to make Guthwulf uncomfortable—there was no love lost between King’s
Hand and the king’s counselor—or was he trying to keep the door as nearly
shut as he possibly could? The castle was cold this spring, and if anyone
deserved to keep warm it was Elias. Perhaps Pryrates was only trying to
conserve heat in the spacious throne room.
   Well, if that was what he was up to, he had failed utterly. The moment
Guthwulf stepped over the threshold and past the door he felt the chill
descend upon him, turning the skin on his strong arms into chicken-flesh.
Looking past the throne, he saw that several of the upper windows were
open, propped with sticks. The cold northern air that swirled down tugged
at the torch flames, making them dance in their cressets.
   “Guthwulf!” Elias boomed, half-rising from his chair of yellowed bone.
The massive dragon skull leered over his shoulder. “I am ashamed to have
kept you waiting. Come here!”
   Guthwulf strode forward up the tiled walkway, trying not to shiver. “You
have much on your mind, Majesty. I do not mind waiting.”
   Elias sat back in his throne as the Earl of Utanyeat dropped to a knee
before him. The king wore a black shirt trimmed with green and silver, and
his boots and breeks were also black. The iron crown of Fingil sat high on
his pale brow, and in a sheath at his side was the sword with the strange
crossed hilt. He had not been without it in weeks, but Guthwulf had no idea
whence it came. The king had never mentioned it, and there was something
queer and unsettling about the blade that prevented Guthwulf from asking.
   “‘Do not mind waiting,’” Elias smirked. “Go on, sit down.” The king
indicated a bench a pace or two back of where the Earl kneeled. “Since
when do you not mind waiting, Wolf? Just because I am king, do not think I
have gone blind and stupid as well.”
   “I am sure that when you have something for your King’s Hand to do,
you will inform me.”
   Things had changed between Guthwulf and his old friend Elias, and the
Earl of Utanyeat did not like that. Elias had never been secretive, but now
Guthwulf felt vast, hidden currents moving beneath the surface of daily
events, currents that the king pretended did not even exist. Things had
changed, and Guthwulf felt sure he knew who was to blame. He looked past
the king’s shoulder at Pryrates, who was watching him fixedly. When their
eyes met, the red-robed priest lifted a hairless eyebrow, as if in mocking
question.
   Elias rubbed at his temples for a moment. “You will have work enough
and more soon, I promise you. Ah, my head. A crown is indeed a heavy
thing, friend. I sometimes wish I could lay it down and go off somewhere,
like we once did so often. Free companions of the road!” The king turned
his grim smile from Guthwulf to his counselor. “Priest, my head aches
again. Bring me some wine, will you?”
   “At once, my Lord.” Pryrates moved off to the back of the throne room.
   “Where are your pages, Majesty?” Guthwulf asked. The king looked
dreadfully tired, he thought. The whiskers on his unshaven cheeks stood
out, black against his wan skin. “And why, with respect, are you shut up in
this freezing cave of a hall? It is colder than the Devil’s black arse in here,
and smells of mildew beside. Let me light a fire in the grate.”
   “No.” Elias waved a broad hand dismissively. “I don’t want it any
warmer. I’m warm already. Pryrates says it is just an ague. Whatever it is,
the cool air feels good to me. And there is plenty of breeze, so no need to
fear stagnancy or bad humors.”
   Pryrates had returned with the king’s goblet; Elias drained it with a
swallow and dried his lips with his sleeve.
   “Plenty of breeze indeed, Majesty,” Guthwulf grinned sourly. “Well, my
king, you . . . and Pryrates . . . know best, and doubtless have nothing to
learn from a fighting man. Is there some other way I can serve you?”
   “I think perhaps you can, although the task may not be much to your
liking. First, though, tell me: has Earl Fengbald returned?”
   Guthwulf nodded. “I spoke with him this morning, sire.”
   “I have summoned him.” Elias held out his cup for more wine, and
Pryrates brought the ewer and poured. “But since you have seen him, tell
me now: is his news good?”
   “I’m afraid not, sire. The spy you seek, Morgenes’ henchman, is still at
large.”
   “God’s curses!” Elias rubbed at a spot just beside his eyebrow. “Did he
not have the hounds I gave him? And the master-huntsman?”
    “Yes, Majesty, and he left them still on the hunt, but in fairness to
Fengbald I must say that you have set him a nearly impossible task.”
    Elias narrowed his eyes, staring, and for a moment Guthwulf felt he
faced a stranger. Then the bumping of ewer against goblet broke the
tension, and Elias relaxed. “Welladay,” he said, “you are most likely right. I
shall have to be careful not to take my frustrations out on Fengbald. He and
I . . . share a disappointment.”
    Guthwulf nodded, watching the king. “Yes, sire, I was alarmed to hear of
your daughter’s illness. How is Miriamele?”
    The king looked briefly to Pryrates, who finished pouring and backed
away. “It is kind of you to ask, Wolf. We do not think she is in any danger,
but Pryrates feels sure that the sea air of Meremund will be the best remedy
for her ailments. It is a pity to put off the marriage, though.” The king stared
into his wine cup as though it were the mouth of a well down which he had
just dropped something valuable. The wind whistled in the open windows.
    After some long moments had passed, the Earl of Utanyeat felt
compelled to speak. “You said that there was some small task I could do for
you, my king?”
    Elias looked up. “Ah. Of course. I wish you to go to Hernysadharc. Since
I was forced to raise the taxes to make up for the cursed, miserable drought,
that old hill-gopher Lluth has defied me. He sent that prancing Eolair to
soothe me with honeyed words, but the time for words is over.”
    “Over, my Lord?” Guthwulf raised an eyebrow.
    “Over,” Elias growled. “I wish you to take a dozen knights—any more
and Lluth would have no choice but resist—and hie you to the Taig to beard
the old miser in his den. Tell him to refuse me my rightful due is to slap my
face . . . to spit on the very Dragonbone Chair. But be subtle, say nothing in
front of his knights that will shame him into resistance—nevertheless, make
it clear that to deny me further will risk his walls falling in flames about his
head. Make him fear, Guthwulf.”
    “I can do that, Lord.”
    Elias smiled tightly. “Good. And while you’re there, keep an eye open
for any sign of Josua’s whereabouts. There is no news from Naglimund,
though my spies have it ringed ’round. It is possible my treacherous brother
might have gone to Lluth. It may even be he who is fueling Hernystir’s
obstinance!”
    “I will be your Eye as well as your Hand, my King.”
    “If I may, King Elias?” At the king’s elbow, Pryrates lifted a finger.
    “Speak, priest.”
    “I would also like to suggest that our lord of Utanyeat keep an eye out
for the boy, Morgenes’ spy. It would help to supplement Fengbald’s effort.
We need that boy, Majesty—what good to slay the serpent if the hatchlings
go free?”
    “If I find the young viper,” Guthwulf grinned, “I will happily grind him
beneath my heel.”
    “No!” Elias shouted, startling Guthwulf with his vehemence. “No! The
spy must live, and any of his companions, until we have them here in the
Hayholt, safe. There are questions we must ask them.” Elias, as if
embarrassed by his outburst, turned strangely pleading eyes to his old
friend. “You understand that, surely?”
    “Of course, Majesty,” Guthwulf answered quickly.
    “They need only be brought to us with the breath still quick in their
bodies,” said Pryrates, calm as a baker talking of flour. “Then we shall
discover everything.”
    “Enough.” Elias slid farther back on his seat of bone. Guthwulf was
surprised to see drops of sweat beading his forehead, even as the Earl of
Utanyeat was shivering in the chill air. “Go, now, old friend. Bring me
Lluth’s full allegiance, or if not, I will send you back to bring me his head.
Go.”
    “God keep you, Majesty.” Guthwulf dropped off the bench onto one
knee, then rose to his feet and backed down the aisle. The banners above his
head swung, wind-whipped; in the fluid shadows thrown by the flickering
torches the clan-animals and heraldic beasts seemed engaged in an eerie,
fitful dance.

                                    •••

   Guthwulf met Fengbald in the antechamber hall. The Earl of Falshire had
bathed the grit of the road from his face and hair since their meeting that
morning, and was dressed in a red velvet jerkin with the silver eagle of his
family chased on the breast, its feathers twining in a fanciful pattern.
   “Ho, Guthwulf, have you seen him?” he asked.
   The Earl of Utanyeat nodded. “Yes, and you will, too. God curse it, he is
the one who should be taking salt air at Meremund instead of Miriamele.
He looks . . . I don’t know, he looks damned ill. And the throne chamber is
cold as frost.”
   “So it’s true?” Fengbald asked sullenly. “About the princess? I was
hoping he’d changed his mind.”
   “Gone west to the sea. Your great day will have to wait a bit, it looks.”
Guthwulf smirked. “I’m sure you’ll find something to keep your interest up
until the princess returns.”
   “That’s not the problem.” The Earl of Falshire’s mouth twisted as though
he tasted something sour. “I just fear he’s trying to back out of his promise.
I have heard that nobody knew she was ill until she was gone.”
   “You worry too much,” Guthwulf said. “It’s womanish. Elias needs an
heir. Be grateful that you fit his bill of particulars for a son-in-law better
than I do.” Guthwulf showed his teeth in a mocking smile. “I would go to
Meremund and get her.” He gave a mock salute and sauntered away, leaving
Fengbald standing before the high oak doors of the throne room.




   She could tell from far away up the corridor that it was Earl Fengbald,
and that he was in a foul temper. His arm-swinging walk, like a young boy
sent away from the supper table, and the loud, deliberate banging of his
boot heels on the floor stones trumpeted his mood before him.
   She reached forward and tugged at Jael’s elbow. When the cow-eyed girl
looked up, already sure she’d done something else wrong, Rachel made a
gesture toward the approaching Earl of Falshire.
   “Better move that bucket, girl.” She took the scrubbing broom from
Jael’s hand. The pail of soapy water stood in the center of the hallway,
directly in the path of the oncoming nobleman.
   “Hurry up, you stupid girl!” Rachel hissed, a touch of alarm tingeing her
voice. The moment the words were out Rachel knew she should not have
uttered them. Fengbald was cursing to himself, his face set in a petulant
snarl. Jael, in a frenzy of ill-coordinated haste, let the bucket slide through
her wet fingers. It struck the floor with a loud thump, and a gout of sudsy
water slopped over the rim to splatter onto the hallway. Fengbald, upon
them now, stepped squarely in the spreading puddle. He lost his balance for
a moment, throwing his arms up as he slid, then clutched at a tapestry on
the wall for support as Rachel watched in helpless, anticipatory horror. It
was a stroke of luck that the hanging held Fengbald’s weight long enough
for him to regain his equilibrium; nonetheless, a moment later the tapestry
itself pulled free at an upper corner and slid gently down the wall to sag into
the soapy pool.
   Rachel looked at the Earl of Falshire’s reddening face for only a moment
before turning to Jael. “Go, you clumsy cow. Get on with you. Now!” Jael,
with a hopeless glance at Fengbald, turned and ran, her fat rump wagging
pitifully.
   “Come back here, you slut!” Fengbald screamed, jaw trembling with
rage. His long black hair, disarranged, hung in his face. “I’ll have my due,
my due for . . . for this . . . this . . . !”
   Rachel, keeping an eye cocked toward the Earl, bent and lifted the
sodden corner of the tapestry out of the water. There was no way she could
re-hang it; she stood holding it, watching it drip as Fengbald raged.
   “Look! Look at my boots! I’ll have that filthy bitch’s throat slit for this!”
The Earl turned his eye onto Rachel. “How dare you send her away?”
   Rachel cast her eyes down, not hard to do since the young nobleman
stood at least a foot taller than she. “I’m sorry, Lord,” she said, and her
honest fear put a convincing tone of respect into her voice. “She is a stupid
girl, Master, and she will be beaten for it, but I am the Mistress of
Chambermaids and I take the blame, you see. I’m very, very sorry.”
   Fengbald stared down at her for a moment, and his eyes narrowed. Then,
as swiftly as an arrow strikes, he reached out and slapped Rachel across the
face. Her hand flew up to the red mark spreading across her cheek,
spreading as the puddle had across the flagstones.
   “Then give that to the fat slut,” Fengbald spat, “and if I run into her
again, you tell her I’ll break her neck.” He stared at the Mistress of
Chambermaids for a moment, then walked on down the hall, leaving a trail
of heel-and-toe boot prints shimmering wetly on the flags.

                                     •••
   And he could do it, too. Rachel thought to herself later as she sat on her
bed holding a wet washrag to her burning cheek. Across the hall, in the
maid’s dormitory, Jael was sobbing. Rachel had not had the heart even to
shout at her, but the sight of Rachel’s swelling face had been punishment
enough to send the lumpy, soft-hearted girl into a paroxysm of tears.
   Sweet Rhiap and Pelippa. I’d rather be slapped twice than listen to her
blubbering.
   Rachel rolled over onto the hard pallet—she kept it on a board because
of her always-aching back—and pulled the blanket up over her head to dull
the sound of Jael’s weeping. Wrapped in the blanket she could feel her own
warm breath wreathing her face.
   This must be what it’s like to be laundry in the basket, she thought, and
then chided herself for such simplemindedness. You’re getting old, old
woman . . . old and useless. Suddenly she found tears coming, the first she
had cried since the news about Simon.
   I’m just so tired. Sometimes I think I’m going to drop where I stand, fall
over like a broken broom at the feet of these young monsters—stamping
around my castle, treating us like we were dirt—and they’d probably just
push me out with the dust. So tired . . . if only . . . if . . .
   The air beneath the blanket was thick and warm. She had finished crying
—what good were tears, anyway? Leave them to her stupid, flighty girls—
and now she felt herself falling into sleep, succumbing to its heaviness as
though drowning in warm, sticky water.
   And in her dream Simon was not dead, had not died in the terrible fire
that had also taken Morgenes, and several of the guardsmen who had rushed
to put it out. Even Count Breyugar, they said, had perished in the
catastrophe, crushed beneath the collapse of the flaming roof . . . No, Simon
was alive, and healthy. Something about him was different, but Rachel
could not say what—the look in his eye, the harder line of his jaw?—but
that did not matter. It was Simon, alive, and as she dreamed Rachel’s heart
was full again. She saw him, the dead boy—her dead boy, really: hadn’t she
raised him like a mother until he was taken away?—and he was standing in
a place of near-absolute whiteness, staring up at a great, white tree that
stretched into the air like a ladder to the Throne of God. And though he
stood resolutely, his head flung back and his eyes upon the tree, Rachel
could not help noticing that his hair, that thick reddish tangle, was badly in
need of cutting . . . well, she would see to that soon, right enough . . . the
boy needed a firm hand. . . .

                                      •••

   When she woke, pulling the smothering blanket aside in a panic to find
more darkness around her—this time the darkness of evening—the weight
of loss and grief came sliding back down like a wet tapestry. As she sat up
on the bed and climbed slowly to her feet the washrag tumbled free, dry as
an autumn leaf. There was no call for her to be laying about, pining like
some fluttery girlchild. There was work that needed doing, Rachel
reminded herself, and no rest this side of Heaven.




  The tabor rattled, and the lute player plucked a gentle chord before
beginning the last verse.

               “. . . And now dost thou come, my lady fair
               In Khandery-cloth and silks withal?
               Then if thou wouldst rule o’er my heart
               Take foot now and follow to Emettin’s Hall!”

   The musician finished with a flurry of delicate notes, then bowed as
Duke Leobardis applauded.
   “Emettin’s Hall!” the duke said to Eolair, Count of Nad Mullach, who
followed Leobardis’ example with his own dutiful applause. Secretly, the
Hernystirman felt sure that he had heard better. He was not much taken by
the love ballads that were so popular here in the Nabbanai court.
   “I am fond of that song,” the duke smiled. His long white hair and pink
cheeks gave him the look of a favorite old great-uncle, the sort who drank
too much stout at the Aedontide feasts and then tried to teach the children
how to whistle. Only the flowing white robe trimmed in lapis and gold, and
the golden circlet on his head with its mother-of-pearl kingfisher,
proclaimed him as different than ordinary men. “Come, Count Eolair, I
thought that music was the lifeblood of the Taig. Does not Lluth count
himself Osten Ard’s greatest patron of harpers, and your Hernystir the
natural home of musicians?” The duke leaned across the arm of his sky-
blue chair to pat Eolair’s hand.
    “King Lluth does indeed keep his harpers beside him at all times,” Eolair
agreed. “Please, Duke, if I seem preoccupied, it is in no way due to any
stinting on your part. Your kindness has been indeed a thing to remember.
No, I must admit I am still bothered about the matters we discussed earlier.”
    A look of concern came to the duke’s mild blue eyes. “I have told you,
my Eolair, that there is a time for such things. It is very wearing to have to
wait, but there you are.” Leobardis motioned to the lute player, who had
been waiting patiently on one knee. The musician rose, bowed, and moved
off. His fantastically intricate garment flounced around him as he joined a
group of courtiers similarly garbed in sumptuously embroidered robes and
tunics. The ladies had supplemented their outfits with exotic hats winged
like seabirds, or crested like the fins of bright fish. The colors in the throne
room, like those of the courtiers’ costumes, were muted: tasteful blues,
yellow beiges, pinks, whites, and foam greens. The impression was that of a
palace built from delicate sea-stones, everything smoothed and softened by
the clutch of the ocean.
    Beyond the gentlemen and ladies of the court, taking up the whole
southwest wall facing the duke’s chair, were the high arched windows that
looked out over the active, sun-tipped green sea. The ocean, which threw
itself ceaselessly against the rocky headland on which the ducal palace
perched, was a vibrant, living tapestry. Watching through the day as the
moving light danced on its surface, or revealed patches of still sea as heavy
and translucent as jade, Eolair frequently wished to sweep the courtiers
from the way, send them tumbling and squeaking from the room so that
nothing would obscure his view.
    “Perhaps you are right, Duke Leobardis,” Eolair said at last. “One must
stop talking sometime, even when the subject is a vital one. I suppose,
sitting here, I should be taking a lesson from the ocean. It doesn’t need to
work hard to get what it wants; eventually it wears the rocks away, the
beaches . . . even the mountains.”
    Leobardis liked this sort of conversation better. “Ah, yes, the sea never
changes, does it? And yet, it is always changing.”
   “That’s true, my lord. And it is not always quiet. Sometimes there are
storms.”
   As the duke cocked his head toward the Hernystirman, unsure whether
this remark meant something more than was immediately obvious, his son
Benigaris strode into the room, nodding briefly to some of the courtiers who
greeted him as he moved toward the duke’s chair.
   “The duke my father; Count Eolair,” he said, bowing once to each. Eolair
smiled, and put out a hand to clasp Benigaris’.
   “It’s good to see you,” the Hernystirman said. Benigaris was taller than
when he had last seen him, but the duke’s son had then been only seventeen
or eighteen. Nearly two decades had passed, and Eolair was not displeased
to see that despite his being a good eight years the elder, it was Benigaris
who had thickened around the waist, not he. Nonetheless, the duke’s son
was tall and broad-shouldered, with intent dark eyes beneath thick black
brows. He made quite an imposing figure in his belted tunic and quilted
vest—an energetic contrast to his affable father.
   “Héa, it has been a long time,” Benigaris agreed. “We shall talk at supper
tonight.” Eolair did not think he sounded very excited at the prospect.
Benigaris turned to his father. “Sir Fluiren is here to see you. He is with the
chamberlain at the moment.”
   “Ah, good old Fluiren! There is irony for you, Eolair. One of the greatest
knights Nabban has ever produced.”
   “Only your brother Camaris was ever called greater,” Eolair interrupted,
not adverse to resurrecting the memories of a more martial Nabban.
   “Yes, my dear brother.” Leobardis smiled a sad smile. “Well, to think that
Fluiren should be coming to see me as an emissary of Elias!”
   “There is a certain irony,” Eolair said lightly.
   Benigaris curled his lip with impatience. “He’s waiting for you. I think
you should see him quickly, as a gesture of respect to the High King.”
   “My, my!” Leobardis turned an amused glance toward Eolair. “Do you
hear my son order me?” When the duke turned back to Benigaris, Eolair
thought there might be something in Leobardis’ gaze beside amusement—
anger? Worry? “Yes, then, tell my old friend Fluiren I will see him . . . let
me think . . . yes, in the Council Hall. Will you join us, Eolair?”
   Benigaris leaped in. “Father, I do not think you should invite even so
trusted a friend as the count in to hear secret communications from the High
King!”
    “And what need, may I ask, is there for secrets to be kept from
Hernystir?” the duke asked. Anger had crept into his voice.
    “Please, Leobardis, I have things I must do anyway. I shall walk in later
to say hello to Fluiren.” Eolair rose and bowed.
    As he stopped on his way across the throne room to look one more time
on the splendid view, he heard the voices of Leobardis and his son raised
behind him in muffled argument.
    Waves make more waves as these Nabbanai say, thought Eolair. It looks
as though Leobardis’ balance is more delicate than I thought. Doubtless
that is why he is so unwilling to talk frankly with me about his troubles with
the king. A good thing it is that Leobardis is a tougher stalk than he appears
to be.
    He heard the courtiers whispering behind him, and turned to see several
of them looking in his direction. He smiled and nodded. The women
blushed, covering their mouths with their flowing sleeves; the men nodded
gravely and quickly looked away. He knew what they were thinking—he
was a curiosity, a rustic and untutored westerner, even if he was an old
friend of the duke’s. No matter what he wore, or how perfectly he spoke,
still they would feel the same. Suddenly, Eolair felt a deep longing for his
home in Hernystir. He had been too long in foreign courts.
    The waves rushed against the rocks below, as though the sea would not
be satisfied until its monstrous patience had at last brought the palace
tumbling down into its watery grasp.
    Eolair spent the rest of the afternoon strolling the high, airy hallways and
meticulous gardens of the Sancellan Mahistrevis. Although it was now the
duke’s palace and the capitol of Nabban, once it had been the seat of Man’s
whole empire in Osten Ard; diminished in importance now, still its glories
were many.
    Perched on the rocky knob of the Sancelline Hill, the palace’s western
walls overlooked the sea which had always been Nabban’s lifeblood—
indeed, all of Nabban’s noble houses used water birds as the symbols of
their power: the Benidrivine kingfisher of the current duke’s line, the
Prevan osprey and Ingadarine albatross; even the Heron of Sulis that had
once, briefly, flown over the Hayholt in Erkynland.
   East of the palace the city of Nabban itself spread down the peninsula’s
neck, a crowded, swarming city of hills and close quarters, thinning at last
as the peninsula widened out into the meadows and farms of the Lakeland.
From the known world to this peninsular duchy and bridal-veil of island
possessions, Nabban’s vistas had narrowed, and its rulers had turned in on
themselves. But once, not too long ago, the mantle of the Nabbanai
Imperators had covered the world, from the brackish Wran to the farthest
reaches of icy Rimmersgard; in those days the wrangling of osprey and
pelican and the strivings of heron and gull had carried as their reward a
prize worth any risk.
   Eolair walked in the Hall of Fountains, where jets of glimmering spray
arched up to commingle as fine mist beneath the open latticework of the
stone roof, and wondered if there was yet the will left in the Nabbanai to
fight, or whether they had simply come to terms with their own gradual
diminution, so that Elias’ provocations only served to drive them further
into their beautiful, delicate shell. Where now were the men of greatness
like those who had carved Nabban’s empire out of the rough stone of Osten
Ard—men like Tiyagaris or Anitulles . . . ?
   Of course, he thought, there was Camaris—a man who, had he not found
in himself a stronger call to serve than to be served, might have held the
willing world in the palm of his hand. Camaris had been a mighty man
indeed.
   And who are we Hernystirmen to speak? he wondered. Since Hern the
Great, what mighty men have risen up in our western lands? Tethtain, who
took the Hayholt from Sulis? Perhaps. But who else? Where is Hernystir’s
Hall of Fountains, where are our great palaces and churches?
   But of course, that is the difference. He looked out past the streaming
fountains to the cathedral spire of the Sancellan Aedonitis, the palace of the
Lector and Mother Church. We of the Hernystiri do not look at the hill
streams and say: how can I bring that to my home? We build our homes
beside the stream. We do not have a faceless God to glorify with towers
taller than the trees of the Circoille. We know that the gods live in the trees
and in the bones of the earth, and in the rivers that splash high as any
fountain, racing down from the Grianspog mountains.
   We never wanted to rule the world. He smiled to himself, remembering
the Taig at Hernysadharc, a castle made not of stone but wood: oak-hearted
to match the hearts of his people. Really, now, all we want is to be left
alone. Still, with all their years of conquest, perhaps these Nabban folk
have forgotten sometimes you have to fight for that, too.
   As he left the room of fountains, Eolair of Nad Mullach brushed past two
legion guardsmen coming in.
   “Bloody hillman,” he heard one of them say, eyeing his garb and
horsetail of black hair.
   “Heá, you know,” the other replied, “every now and then the sheep-
herders need to come and see what a city looks like.”
   “. . . And how is my little niece Miriamele, Count?” the duchess asked.
Eolair was seated at her left hand near the head of the long table. Fluiren, as
a more recent arrival and a distinguished son of Nabban, had the place of
honor on the right of Duke Leobardis.
   “She seemed well, my lady.”
   “Did you see much of her while you were at the High King’s court?” The
Duchess Nessalanta leaned toward him, raising an exquisitely drawn
eyebrow. The duchess was a sternly beautiful older woman, although how
much of that beauty was due to the skilled manipulations of her
hairdressers, seamstresses, and lady’s maids, Eolair had no way of guessing.
Nessalanta was exactly the kind of woman who made Eolair—no stranger
to the company of the fairer sex—feel completely out of his depth. She was
younger than her husband the duke, but she was the mother of a man well
into his prime. What here was lasting beauty and what was artifice? Then
again, what did it matter? Nessalanta was a powerful woman, and only
Leobardis himself held greater sway over the affairs of the nation.
   “I was not often in the princess’ company, Duchess, but we had several
chances to speak at supper. She was as delightful as ever, but I’m thinking
she was already very homesick for Meremund.”
   “Hmmm.” The duchess popped a corner of her trencher-bread into her
mouth and then delicately licked her fingers. “It was interesting you should
mention that, Count Eolair. I have just had news from Erkynland that she
has returned to the castle at Meremund.” She raised her voice. “Father
Dinivan?”
   A few seats down a young priest looked up from his meal. Although his
scalp was shaved in the monasterial style, the hair that remained was curly
and rather long. “Yes, my lady?” he asked.
   “Father Dinivan is His Sacredness the Lector Ranessin’s private
secretary,” Nessalanta explained. The Hernystirman made an impressed
face, and Dinivan laughed.
   “I don’t think it’s accreditable to any great wit or talent on my part,” he
said. “The lector also takes in stray dogs. Escritor Velligis gets very upset.
‘The Sancellan Aedonitis is not a kennel,’ he tells the lector, but His
Sacredness smiles and says: ‘Neither is Osten Ard a nursery, but the
Benevolent Lord lets His children remain, for all their mischief.” Dinivan
waggled his bushy brows. “It’s hard to argue with the lector.”
   “Isn’t it true,” the Duchess said as Eolair laughed, “that when you saw
the king he said his daughter was gone to Meremund?”
   “Yes, yes he did,” Dinivan said, more serious now. “He said she had
taken ill, and the court physicians recommended sea air.”
   “I am sorry to hear that.” Eolair looked past the duchess to the duke and
old Sir Fluiren, who were conversing quietly amidst the uproar of supper—
for a refined people, he reflected, the Nabbanai certainly enjoyed loud table
talk.
   “Well,” Nessalanta pronounced, sitting back in her chair as a page
scurried up with a finger basin, “it just proves that you can’t force people to
be what they’re not. Miriamele has Nabbanai blood, of course, and our
blood is salty as the sea. We are not meant to be taken away from the coast.
People should stay where they belong.”
   And what, the count wondered to himself, are you trying to tell me, my
gracious lady? To stay in Hernystir and leave your husband—and your
duchy—alone? To, in effect, go back to my own kind?
   Eolair watched Leobardis’ and Fluiren’s discussion wistfully. He had
been maneuvered, he knew: there was no gracious way he could ignore the
duchess and insinuate himself into their conversation. Meanwhile, old
Fluiren was at work on the duke, transmitting Elias’ blandishments. And
threats? No, probably not. Elias would not have sent the dignified Fluiren
for that. He had Guthwulf the King’s Hand ready for use whenever such a
tool was called for.
   Resigned, he made light talk with the duchess, but his heart was not in it.
He was sure now that she knew his mission and was hostile to it. Benigaris
was the apple of her eye, and he had been avoiding Eolair all evening.
Nessalanta was an ambitious woman, and doubtless felt the fortunes of
Nabban would be better assured if they were yoked to the power of
Erkynland—even a domineering, tyrannical Erkynland—instead of the
pagans of Hernystir.
   And, Eolair realized suddenly, she has a marriageable daughter herself,
the Lady Antippa. Perhaps her interest in Miriamele’s health is not just that
of a kindly aunt’s for her niece.
   The duke’s daughter Antippa was pledged already, he knew, to one Baron
Devasalles, a foppish-looking young nobleman who at this precise moment
was arm wrestling with Benigaris in a pool of wine at the far end of the
table. But maybe Nessalanta had her eye on greater things.
   If Princess Miriamele will not—or cannot—marry . . . Eolair mused,
then perhaps the duchess has eyes for Fengbald to marry her daughter
instead. The Earl of Falshire would be a much finer catch than any back-
row Nabbanai baron. And Duke Leobardis would then be tied to Erkynland
with cords of steel.
   So now, the count realized, there was not only Josua’s whereabouts to
worry over, but Miriamele’s as well. What a tangle!
   Just think how old Isgrimnur would see this, with all his complaints
about intriguing! His beard would catch fire!
   “Tell me, Father Dinivan,” the count said, turning to the priest, “what
does your holy book have to say on the art of politicking?”
   “Well,” a look of concentration momentarily clouded Dinivan’s homely,
intelligent face, “the Book of the Aedon speaks often of the trials of
nations.” He thought a moment more. “One of my favorite passages has
always been: ‘If your enemy comes to speak bearing a sword, open your
door to him and speak, but keep your own sword at hand. If he comes to you
empty-handed, greet him the same way. But if he comes to you bearing gifts,
stand on your walls and cast stones down on him.’” Dinivan wiped his
fingers on his black cassock.
   “A wise book, indeed,” nodded Eolair.