
                        Back into the Heart




The wind flung rain into their faces as they ran eastward through the
darkness toward the hidden foothills. The clamor of Isgrimnur’s camp
receded, muffled in a blanket of thunder.
   Coursing across the wet plain, Simon’s panicked exhilaration began to
recede as well; the ecstatic sensation of energy, the feeling that he could run
and run through the night like a deer, was gradually cooled by the rain and
relentless pace. Within half a league his gallop had slowed to a fast walk;
soon even that was an effort. Where a bony hand had clutched his knee he
felt the joint stiffening like a rusty hinge; bands of pain around his throat
throbbed at every deep breath.
   “Morgenes . . . sent you?” he shouted.
   “Later, Simon,” Binabik gasped. “All told later.”
   They ran and ran, tripping and splashing over the sodden turf.
   “Then . . .” Simon panted, “then what . . . were those things . . . ?”
   “The . . . attacking things?” Even as he ran the troll made an odd hand-
to-mouth gesture. “Bukken—‘diggers’ they are . . . also called.”
   “What are they?” Simon asked, and nearly slipped on a patch of mud,
skidding for a moment flat-footed.
   “Bad.” He grimaced. “There is no more needs telling now.”
   When they could run no longer they walked, trudging on until the sun
edged up behind the wash of clouds, a candle behind a gray sheet. The
Wealdhelm stood before them, thrown up in relief against the pallid dawn
like the bowed backs of monks at prayer.
                                    •••

   In the meager shelter of a cluster of rounded granite boulders, set starkly
in the sea of grass as though in imitation of the hills beyond, Binabik made
a sort of camp. After walking around the rocks to find the spot most
sheltered from the shifting rains, he helped Simon down into a space where
two boulders leaned together, forming an angle in which the boy could
recline with some minimal comfort. Simon fell quickly into limp, exhausted
sleep.
   Flying raindrops skipped from the tops of the boulders as Binabik
crouched, tucking in the boy’s cloak—which the troll had brought with their
other things all the way from Saint Hoderund’s—then rooted in his pack for
some dried fish to chew, and his knucklebones. Qantaqa returned from an
investigatory tour of her new territory to curl up on Simon’s shins. The troll
took the bones out and tossed them, using his pack bag for a table.
   The Shadowed Path. Binabik grinned a bitter grin. Then, Masterless
Ram, and again, The Shadowed Path. He cursed, quietly but lengthily—
only a fool would ignore such a clear message. Binabik knew himself to be
many things, and foolish was occasionally one of them, but here, now, there
was no room to take such chances.
   He pulled his fur hood back up around his face and curled in beside
Qantaqa. To any passing by—if they could have seen anything at all in the
faint light, and with rain in their faces—the three companions would have
looked like nothing so much as an unusual, dun-colored lichen on the lee-
side of the rocks.




   “So, what kind of a game have you been playing with me, Binabik?”
Simon asked sullenly. “How do you know of Doctor Morgenes?” In the few
hours he had slept the pale dawn had turned into a cold, gloomy morning,
unredeemed by campfire or breakfast. The sky, swollen with clouds, hung
close overhead like a low ceiling.
   “It is no game I am playing, Simon,” the troll replied. He had cleaned
and bandaged Simon’s neck and leg wounds, and was patiently seeing to
Qantaqa’s. Only one of the wolf’s injuries was serious, a deep slash on the
inside of her foreleg. As Binabik picked grit from the skin, Qantaqa sniffed
at his fingers, trusting as a child.
   “I have no regret for not telling you; if I had not felt forced, still you
would not know.” He rubbed a fingerful of salve into the cut and then
turned his mount loose. She promptly bent and began licking and biting at
the leg. “I knew that she would do that,” he said in mild reproach, then
mustered a careful smile. “Like you, she is not thinking I know my work.”
   Simon, realizing he had been unconsciously plucking at his own
bandages, sat forward. “Come, Binabik, just tell me. How do you know of
Morgenes? Where do you really come from?”
   “I am from exactly where I say,” the troll replied indignantly. “I am a
Qanuc. And I am not merely knowing of Morgenes, once I met him. He is a
good friend of my master. They are . . . colleagues, I think the learned men
say.”
   “What do you mean?”
   Binabik sat back against the rock. Although at the moment there was no
rain to shelter from, the cutting wind alone was reason enough to stay close
to the outcropping. The little man seemed to be considering his words
carefully. He looked tired to Simon, his dark skin loose and a shade paler
than normal.
   “First,” the troll said at last, “you must be knowing something of my
master. He was named Ookequk. He was the . . . Singing Man, you would
call him, of our mountain. When we say Singing Man, we mean not
someone who is just singing, but someone who is remembering the old
songs and old wisdom. Like doctor and priest joined together, it seems to
me.
   “Ookequk was my master because of certain things the elders thought
they were seeing in me. It was a great honor to be the one to share in
Ookequk’s wisdom—I went three days without eating food when I was
told, just to make myself of the right pureness.” Binabik smiled. “When I
announced this pridefully to my new master, he hit me on my ear. ‘You are
too young and stupid to be starving yourself on purpose,” he said to me. “It
has presumptuousness. You may only starve by accident.’”
   Binabik’s grin split open into a laugh; when Simon thought about it for a
moment, he laughed a little, too.
   “In any way,” he continued, “I will be telling you someday about my
years learning from Ookequk—he was a great, fat troll, Simon; he weighed
more than you, and he was being my height only—but now the point must
be reached sooner.
   “I do not know with exactness where my master first met Morgenes, but
it was long before I came to his cave. They were friends, though, and my
master taught Morgenes the art of making birds carry messages. They had
much talk in letters, my master and your doctor. They shared many . . .
ideas about the world’s ways.
   “Just two summers gone my parents were killed. Their death came in the
dragon-snow of the mountain we call Little Nose, and once they were no
more, I devoted all my thinking—well, almost all—to learning from master
Ookequk. When he told me this thaw that I was to be accompanying him on
a great journey south, I was filled with excitement. It was clear-seeming to
me that this would be my test of worthiness.
   “What I was not knowing,” the troll said, poking up the muddy grass
before him with his walking stick—almost angrily, Simon thought, but
there was no anger to hear in his voice—“what I was not told, was that
Ookequk had more important reasons for traveling than the finish of my
apprenticeship. He had been receiving words from Doctor Morgenes . . .
and some others . . . of things that disturbed him, and he felt it was time to
be returning the visit Morgenes had made on him long years before, when I
first was with him.”
   “What ‘things’?” Simon asked. “What did Morgenes tell him?”
   “If you are not yet knowing,” Binabik said serious, “then perhaps there
are still truths you can do without. On that I must think, but for now let me
say what I can—what I must.”
   Simon nodded stiffly, rebuked.
   “I will not either burden you with all the long story of our southward trip.
I was realizing quite early on that my master had not given me all the truth,
either. He was worried, much worried, and when he cast the bones or read
certain signs in the sky and wind he became even more so. Also, some of
our experiences were very bad. I have traveled by myself, as you know,
much of it before becoming a servant of my master Ookequk, yet never
have I seen times so bad for travelers. An experience much like yours of
last night we were having just below the lake Drorshullvenn, on the
Frostmarch.”
   “You mean those. . . . Bukken?” Simon asked. Even with daylight around
them, the thought of the clasping hands was terrifyingly vivid.
   “Indeed,” Binabik nodded, “and that was . . . is . . . being a bad sign, that
they should attack so. It is not in the memory of my people that the
Boghanik, which is our name for them, should assault a group of armed
men. Bold it is, and frighteningly so. Their usual way is to be preying on
animals and solitary travelers.”
   “What are they?”
   “Later, Simon, there is much that you will learn if you have patience with
me. My master did not tell me all, either—which is not saying, please
notice, that I am your master—but he was very much upset. In our whole
journeying down the Frostmarch I did not see him sleeping. When I would
sleep, still he would be awake, and the morning would find him up before
me. He was not young, either: he was old before I came to him, and several
years I was by him studying.
   “One night, when first we had crossed down into the northern parts of
Erkynland, he asked me to be standing watch so that he could walk the
Road of Dreams. We were in a place much like this,” Binabik gestured
around at the bleak plain below the hills, “spring arrived, but not yet broken
through. This would have been, oh, perhaps around the time of your All
Fool’s Day or the day before.”
   All Fool’s Eve . . . Simon tried to think back, to remember. The night that
terrible noise awakened the whole castle. The night before . . . the rains
came . . .
   “Qantaqa was off hunting, and the old ram One-eye—a great, fat, patient
thing he was to carry Ookequk!—was sleeping by the fire. We were alone
with just the sky. My master ate of the dream-bark that came to him from
the marshy Wran in the south. He crossed over into a kind of sleeping. He
had not told me why he was doing this, but I could guess he was searching
for answers that he could find no other way. The Boghanik had frightened
him, because there was wrongness in their actions.
   “Soon he was mumbling, as he was usually doing as his heart walked the
Road of Dreams. Much was not understandable, but one or two things that
he said were also said more lately by Brother Dochais, which is why you
may have seen me show surprise.”
   Simon had to restrain a sour smile. And he had thought that it had been
his own fear which was so obvious, sparked by the Hernystirman’s delirious
words!
   “Suddenly,” the troll continued, still poking fixedly with his stick at the
spongy turf, “it seemed to me that something had caught at him—again,
with likeness to Brother Dochais. But my master was strong, stronger in his
heart, I think, than nearly anyone, man or troll, and he fought. Struggled
and struggled, he did, all the afternoon long and into the evening, as I was
standing beside him with no help to give but to wet his brow.” Binabik
pulled a handful of grass, tossing it into the air to bat at it with his staff.
“Then, a little past the middle of the night, he said some words to me—
quite calmly, as if he were at drinking with the other elders in the Clan cave
—and died.
   “It was for me, I am thinking, worse than my parents, because they were
lost—just vanished in a snowslide, gone with no trace. I buried Ookequk
there on a hillside. None of the proper rituals were correctly done, and that
is a shame for me. One-eye would not leave without his master; for all I can
know, he may be there still. I am hoping so.”
   The troll was quiet for a while, staring fiercely at the scuffed hide on the
knees of his breeches. His pain was so close to Simon’s own sorrow that the
boy could think of no words to say that would make sense to anyone but
himself.
   After a while Binabik silently opened his bag and proffered a handful of
nuts. Simon took them, along with the waterskin.
   “Then,” Binabik began again, almost as if he had not stopped, “a strange
thing happened.”
   Simon huddled in his cloak and watched the troll’s face as he talked.
   “Two days I had spent beside my master’s burial place. A nice enough
place it was, lying beneath unblocked sky, but my heart was sore because I
knew he would be more happy up high in the mountains. I was thinking of
what I should be doing, whether to continue on to Morgenes in Erchester, or
return to my people and tell them the Singing Man Ookequk was dead.
   “I decided on the afternoon of the second day that I should return to
Qanuc. I had no understanding of the importance of my master’s talk with
Doctor Morgenes—I am still not understanding much, sadly to say—and I
had other . . . responsibilities.
    “As I was calling Qantaqa, and scratching a last time between the horns
of faithful One-eye, a small gray bird fluttered down, landing on Ookequk’s
mound. I recognized it as one of my master’s messenger birds; it was very
tired from carrying a heavy burden, a message and . . . and another thing.
As I approached to capture it, Qantaqa came crashing up along the
underbrush. The bird, it is not surprising, was frightened and leaped into the
air. I barely caught it. It was a nearness, Simon, but I caught it.
    “It was written by Morgenes, and the subject of the note was you, my
friend. It told to the reader—who should have been my master—that you
would be in danger, and traveling alone from the Hayholt toward
Naglimund. It asked my master to be helping you—without your knowing,
if such was possible. It said a few things more.”
    Simon was riveted: this was a missing part of his own story. “What other
things?” he asked.
    “Things only for my master’s eyes.” Binabik’s tone was kindly, but firm.
“Now, it needs no saying that here was a difference. My master was asked a
favor by his old friend . . . but only I could do that favor. This was also
difficult, but from the moment I read Morgenes’ note, I knew I must fulfill
his request. I set out that day before evening toward Erchester.”
    The note said I would be traveling alone. Morgenes never thought he
would escape. Simon felt tears coming, and covered the effort of
suppressing them with a question.
    “How were you supposed to find me?”
    Binabik smiled. “By the use of Qanuc hard work, friend Simon. I had to
pick up your trail—the signs of passing of a young man, no set destination,
things of this kind. Qanuc hard work and a largeness of luck led me to you.”
    A memory flared in Simon’s heart, gray and fearful even in distant
retrospect. “Did you follow me across the lich-yard? The one outside the
city walls?” It had not all been dream, he knew. Something had called his
name.
    The troll’s round face, however, was unreassuringly blank. “No, Simon,”
he said carefully, thinking. “I was not discovering your track until, I think,
upon the Old Forest Road. Why?”
   “It’s not important.” Simon rose and stretched, looking around the damp
flatland. He sat again, and reached for the waterskin. “Well, I guess I
understand, now . . . but I have much to think about. It seems we should
continue to Naglimund, I suppose. What do you think?”
   Binabik looked troubled. “I am not sure, Simon. If the Bukken are active
in the Frostmarch, the road to Naglimund-keep will be too dangerous for a
pair of travelers alone. I must admit I am much worried about what to do
now. I am wishing we had your Doctor Morgenes here to advise us. Are you
in so much peril, Simon, that we could not risk even a message to him
somehow? I am not thinking he wants me to take you through such terrible
dangers.”
   It took a moment for Simon to realize that the “he” Binabik was talking
about was still Morgenes. A second later the astonishing realization struck:
the troll did not know what had happened.
   “Binabik,” he began, and even as he spoke he felt he was inflicting a
kind of wound, “he’s dead. Doctor Morgenes is dead.”
   The little man’s eyes flared wide for a moment, the white around the
brown visible for the first time. An instant later Binabik’s expression froze
in a dispassionate mask.
   “Dead?” he said at last, his voice so cold that Simon felt a strange
defensiveness, as though it was somehow his fault—he, who had cried so
many tears over the doctor!
   “Yes.” Simon considered for a moment, then took a calculated risk. “He
died getting Prince Josua and me out of the castle. King Elias killed him—
well, he had his man Pryrates do it, anyway.”
   Binabik stared into Simon’s eyes, then looked down. “I had knowledge
of Josua’s captivity. In the letter it was mentioned. The rest is . . . tidings
that are very bad.” He stood, and the wind plucked at his straight black hair.
“Let me walk now, Simon. I must think what these things are meaning . . . I
must think . . .”
   His face still emotionless, the little man stepped away from the clutch of
rocks. Qantaqa immediately leaped up to follow, and Binabik started to
shoo her off, then shrugged. She circled him in wide, lazy arcs as he moved
slowly away, head bowed and small hands hidden in his sleeves. Simon
thought he looked far too small for the burdens that he carried.
   Simon was half-hoping that when the troll returned he might be carrying
a fat wood pigeon or something similar. In this he was disappointed.
   “I am sorry, Simon,” the little man said, “but it would have been of small
use anyway. We cannot have a smokeless fire with nothing around but wet
brush, and a smoke-beacon I do not think is good at the moment. Have
some dried fish.”
   The fish, itself in short supply, was neither filling nor tasty, but Simon
chewed morosely at his piece: who knew when he would next get a meal on
this miserable adventure?
   “I have been thinking, Simon. Your news, with no fault of yours, is
hurtful. So soon after my master’s death, to hear of the ending of the doctor,
that good old man . . .” Binabik trailed off, then bent and began shoving
things back into his pack, after first separating out several articles.
   “These are your things—see, I was saving them for you.” He handed
Simon the two familiar cylindrical bundles.
   “This other . . .” Simon said, accepting the packages, “. . . not the arrow,
but this . . .” He handed it back to Binabik. “It’s writing by Doctor
Morgenes.”
   “Truthfully?” Binabik skinned back a corner of the rag wrappings.
“Things that will help us?”
   “I don’t think so,” Simon said. “It’s his life of Prester John. I read some
of it—it’s mostly about battles and things.”
   “Ah. Yes.” Binabik passed it back over to Simon, who pushed it through
his belt. “Too bad, that is. We could use his more specific words at this
moment.” The troll bent and continued pushing objects into his pack.
“Morgenes and Ookequk my master, they were belonging together to a very
special group.” He scooped something out of his belongings and held it up
for Simon to see. It gleamed faintly in the overcast afternoon light, a
pendant of a scroll and quill pen.
   “Morgenes had one of those!” Simon said, leaning close to look.
   “Indeed,” Binabik nodded. “This was my master’s. It is a sigil belonging
to those who join the League of the Scroll. There are, I was told by him,
never more than seven members. Your and my masters are dead—there can
be no more than five left, now.” He snapped his small hand shut on the
pendant and dropped it into the sack.
   “League of the Scroll?” Simon wondered. “What is it?”
   “A group of learned people who share knowledge, I have heard my
master saying. Perhaps something more, but he would never tell me.” He
finished the last of his packing and straightened up. “I am sorry to be saying
this, Simon, but I am afraid we must walk again.”
   “Again?” Aches he had forgotten suddenly flared in Simon’s muscles.
   “I am afraid it is needed. As I was telling, I have been much in thought. I
have thought these things . . .” He tightened his walking stick at the join and
whistled for Qantaqa.
   “Firstly, I am bound for getting you to Naglimund. This has not been
changed, it was unhappily only my resolution that was slipping. The
problem is: I do not trust the Frostmarch. You saw the Bukken—it is likely
you would prefer not to see them again. But it is northward we must travel.
I am thinking, then, that we must go back to Aldheorte.”
   “But Binabik, how will we be any safer there? What’s to keep those
digger-things from coming after us in the forest, where we probably can’t
even run?”
   “A good question to ask. I spoke to you once of the Oldheart—of its age
and . . . and . . . I cannot think of a word in your language, Simon, but ‘soul’
and ‘spirit’ may be giving you an idea.
   “The Bukken can pass beneath the old forest, but not easily. There is
power in the Aldheorte’s roots, power that is not to be lightly broached
by . . . such creatures. Also, there is someone there I must see, someone
who must hear the telling of what happened to my master and yours.”
   Simon was already tired of hearing his own questions, but asked anyway.
“Who is that?”
   “Her name is Geloë. A wise woman she is, one known as a valada—a
Rimmersgard word, that. Also, she can perhaps help us to reach Naglimund,
since we will have to be crossing from the forest side on the east over the
Wealdhelm, a route that is not known to me.”
   Simon pulled his cloak on, hooking the worn clasp beneath his chin.
“Must we leave today?” he asked. “It’s so late in the afternoon.”
   “Simon,” Binabik said as Qantaqa jogged up, tongue lolling, “please
believe me. Even though there are things that I cannot yet tell to you, we
must be true companions. I need your trust. It is not only the business of
Elias’ kingship that is at stake. We have lost, both of us, people who we
were holding dearly—an old man and an old troll who knew much more
than we are knowing. They were both afraid. Brother Dochais, I am
thinking, died of fright. Something evil is waking, and we are foolish if we
spend more time in open ground.”
   “What is waking, Binabik? What evil? Dochais said a name—I heard
him. Just before he died he said . . .”
   “You need not . . . !” Binabik tried to interrupt, but Simon paid him no
heed. He was growing tired of hints and suggestions.
   “. . . Storm King,” he finished resolutely.
   Binabik looked quickly around, as though he expected something terrible
to appear. “I know,” he hissed. “I heard, too, but I do not know much.”
Thunder tolled beyond the distant horizon; the little man looked grim. “The
Storm King is a name of dread in the dark north. Simon, a name out of
legends to frighten with, to conjure with. All I have are small words my
master was giving me sometimes, but it is enough to make me sick with
worry.” He shouldered his bag and started off across the muddy plain,
toward the blunt, crouching line of hills.
   “That name,” he said, his voice incongruously hushed in the midst of
such flat emptiness, “is of itself a thing to wither crops, to bring fevers and
bad dreaming . . .”
   “. . . Rain and bad weather . . . ?” Simon asked, looking up at the ugly,
lowering sky.
   “And other things,” Binabik replied, and touched his palm to his jacket,
just above his heart.