
                   The Hounds of Erkynland




Simon dreamed that he was walking in the Pine Garden of the
Hayholt, just outside the Dining Hall. Above the gently swaying trees hung
the stone bridge that connected hall and chapel. Although he felt no
sensation of cold—indeed, he was not aware of his body at all except as
something to move him from one place to another—gentle flakes of snow
were filtering down around him. The fine, needled edges of the trees were
beginning to blur beneath blankets of white and all was quiet: the wind, the
snow, Simon himself, all moved in a world seemingly without sound or
swift motion.
   The unfelt wind blew more fiercely now, and the trees of the sheltered
garden began to bend before Simon’s passage, parting like ocean waves
around a submerged stone. The snow flurried, and he moved forward into
the opening, into a tree-lined hallway of swirling white. On he went, the
trees leaning back before him like respectful soldiers.
   The garden was never this long, was it?
   Suddenly Simon felt his eyes drawn upward. At the end of the snowy
path stood a great white pillar, looming far over his head into the dark skies.
   Of course, he thought to himself in dreamy half-logic, it’s Green Angel
Tower. He could never walk directly from the garden to the base of the
tower before, but things had changed since he’d been gone . . . things had
changed.
   But if it’s the tower, he thought, staring upward at the immense shape,
why does it have branches? It’s not the tower . . . or at least it isn’t any
more . . . it’s a tree—a great white tree . . .
   Simon sat upright, staring.
   “What is a tree?” asked Binabik, who sat close by, restitching Simon’s
shirt with a bird-bone needle. He finished a moment later, and handed it
back to the youth, who extended a freckled arm from beneath his sheltering
cloak to claim it. “What is a tree, and was your sleeping good?”
   “A dream, that’s all,” Simon said, muffled for a moment as he pulled the
shirt over his head. “I dreamed that Green Angel Tower turned into a tree.”
He looked at Binabik quizzically, but the troll only shrugged.
   “A dream,” Binabik agreed.
   Simon yawned and stretched. It had not been particularly comfortable,
sleeping in a protected crevice on the side of a hill, but it was eminently
preferable to spending a night unprotected on the plain. He had seen the
logic of that quickly enough, once they had gotten moving.
   Sunrise had come while he slept, inconspicuous behind the blanket of
clouds, just a smear of pinkish gray light across the sky. Looking back from
the hillside perch it was difficult to tell where the sky left off and the misty
plains began. The world seemed a murky and unformed place this morning.
   “I saw fires in the night, while you were sleeping,” the troll said, startling
Simon out of his reverie.
   “Fires? Where?”
   Binabik pointed with his left hand, southward along the plain. “Back
there. Do not be worrying, I think they are a far way off. It is quite the
possibility they have nothing to do with us.”
   “I suppose so.” Simon squinted into the gray distance. “Do you think it
might be Isgrimnur and his Rimmersgarders?”
   “It is doubtful.”
   Simon turned to look at the little man. “But you said they would get
away! That they’d survive. . . .”
   The troll gave him an exasperated look. “If you would wait, you would
hear. I am sure they survived, but they were traveling north, and I am
doubting they would turn back. Those fires were farther toward south, as
though . . .”
   “. . . As though they were traveling up from Erkynland,” Simon finished.
   “Yes!” Binabik said, a little testily. “But it could be they are traders, or
pilgrims . . .” He looked around. “Where has Qantaqa now gone to?”
   Simon grimaced. He knew a dodge when he saw one. “Very well. It
could be anything . . . but you were the one counseling speed yesterday. Are
we to wait so we can see first hand if these are merchants or . . . or
diggers?” The joke felt more than a little sour. The last word had not tasted
good in his mouth.
   “Not being stupid is important,” Binabik grunted in disgust. “Boghanik
—the Bukken—light no fires. They hate things that are bright. And no, we
will not be waiting for these fire builders to reach us. We are heading back
to the forest, as I was telling you.” He gestured back over his head. “On the
hill’s far side we will be within sight of it.”
   The brush crackled behind them, and troll and boy jumped in surprise. It
was only Qantaqa, traversing erratically down the hillside, nose held tight to
the ground. When she reached their campsite, she butted Binabik’s arm
until he scratched her head.
   “Qantaqa has a cheerful mood, hmmm?” The troll smiled, showing his
yellow teeth. “Since we have the advantage of a day with heavy clouds,
which will be covering the smoke of a campfire, I am thinking we can at
least have a decent meal before we again take to our feet. Are you in
favor?”
   Simon tried to make his expression a serious one. “I . . . suppose I could
eat something . . . if I must,” he said. “If you really think it’s important . . .”
   Binabik stared, trying to decide if Simon actually disapproved of
breakfast, and the boy felt laughter trying to bubble free.
   Why am I acting like a mooncalf? he wondered. We’re in terrible danger,
and it won’t get any better soon.
   Binabik’s puzzled look was finally too much, and the laughter burst
forth.
   Well, he answered himself, a person can’t worry all the time.

                                       •••

   Simon sighed, contented, and allowed Qantaqa to take the few remaining
bits of squirrel meat from his fingers. He marveled at the delicacy the wolf
could exhibit with those great jaws and gleaming teeth.
   The fire was a small one, since the troll did not believe in unnecessary
risks. A thin stream of smoke curled sinuously in the wind sliding along the
hillside.
   Binabik was reading Morgenes’ manuscript, which he had unwrapped
with Simon’s permission. “It is my hope you understand,” the troll said
without looking up, “that you will not be trying that with any other wolf
beside my friend Qantaqa.”
   “Of course not. It’s amazing how tame she is.”
   “Not tame.” Binabik was emphatic. “She has a bond of honor with me,
and it is including those who are my friends.”
   “Honor?” Simon asked lazily.
   “I am sure you know that term, much as it is bandied about in southern
lands. Honor. Are you thinking such a thing cannot exist between troll and
beast?” Binabik glanced over, then went back to leafing through the
manuscript.
   “Oh, I don’t think much about anything these days,” Simon said airily,
leaning forward to scratch Qantaqa’s deep-furred chin. “I’m just trying to
keep my head down and reach Naglimund.”
   “You are making a gross evasion,” Binabik muttered, but did not pursue
the subject. For a while there was no sound on the hillside but the riffling of
parchment. The morning sun climbed up through the sky.
   “Here,” Binabik said at last, “listen, now. Ah, Daughter of the
Mountains, but I am missing Morgenes more just from reading his words.
Do you know of Nearulagh, Simon?”
   “Certainly. Where King John beat the Nabbanai. There’s a gate at the
castle all covered with carvings of it.”
   “You are right. So then, here Morgenes is writing of the Battle of
Nearulagh, where John was first meeting the famous Sir Camaris. May I
read to you?”
   Simon suppressed a twinge of jealousy. The doctor had not intended that
his manuscript be for Simon and no one else, he reminded himself.

  “‘...So after Ardrivis’ decision—a brave one, some said, arrogant,
  said others—to meet this upstart northern king in the flat plain of the
  Meadow Thrithing before Lake Myrme, proved a disaster. Ardrivis
  pulled the bulk of his troops back into the Onestrine Pass, a narrow
  way between the mountain lakes Eadne and Clodu . . .’”
  “What Morgenes speaks of,” Binabik explained, “is that Ardrivis, the
Imperator of Nabban, did not believe Prester John could come against him
with great force, so far from Erkynland. But the Perdruinese islanders, who
were always being in the Nabbanai shadow, made secret treaty with John
and helped to supply his forces. King John cut Ardrivis’ legions in ribbons
near the Meadow Thrithing, a thing unsuspected as possible by the proud
Nabbanai. Do you see?”
  “I think so.” Simon was not sure, but he had heard enough ballads about
Nearulagh to recognize most of the names. “Read some more.”
  “I shall do so. Let me only be finding the part I wanted to read for
you . . .” He scanned down the page. “Ho!”

  “‘...And so, as the sun sank behind Mount Onestris, the last sun for
  eight thousand dead and dying men, young Camaris, whose father
  Benidrivis-sá Vinitta had taken the Imperator’s Staff from his dying
  brother Ardrivis only an hour before, led a charge of five hundred
  horse, the remainder of the Imperial Guard, in quest of
  vengeance . . .’”

    “Binabik?” Simon interrupted.
    “Yes?”
    “Who took what from which?”
    Binabik laughed. “Forgive me. It is a net full of names to capture at once,
is it not? Ardrivis was the last Imperator of Nabban, although his empire
was no larger, you are seeing, than what is the duchy of Nabban today.
Ardrivis fell out with Prester John, likely because Ardrivis knew that John
had designs on a united Osten Ard, and that eventually there would have to
be conflict. In any way, I will not bore you with all the fighting, but this was
their last battle, as you know. Ardrivis the Imperator was killed by an arrow,
and his brother Benidrivis became the new Imperator . . . for the rest of that
day, only, ending with Nabban’s surrendering. Camaris was the son of
Benidrivis—and being young, too, perhaps fifteen years—and so for that
afternoon he was the last prince of Nabban, as songs are sometimes calling
him . . . understood, now?”
    “Better. It was all those ‘arises’ and ‘ivises’ that left me behind for a
moment.”
  Binabik picked up the parchment and continued reading.

  “‘Now, with the coming of Camaris onto the field, the tired armies of
  Erkynland were much distraught. The young prince’s troops were not
  fresh, but Camaris himself was a whirlwind, a storm of death, and the
  sword Thorn that his dying uncle had given him was like a fork of dark
  lightning. Even at that late moment, the records say, the forces of
  Erkynland might have been routed, but Prester John came onto the
  field, Bright-Nail clutched in his gauntleted fist, and cut a path
  through the Nabbanai Imperial Guard until he was face to face with
  the gallant Camaris.’”

   “This is the part I wanted you especially to hear,” Binabik said as he
leafed forward to the next sheet.
   “This is very good,” Simon said. “Will Prester John cleave him in
twain?”
   “Ridiculous!” snorted the troll. “How, then, would they come to be the
fastest and most famous of friends?—‘cleave him in twain’!” He resumed.

  “‘The ballads say that they fought all day and into the night, but I
  doubt greatly that was so. Certainly they fought a long while, but
  doubtless the twilight and darkness had nearly arrived anyway, and it
  only seemed to some of the tired observers that these two great men
  had battled all the day long . . .’”

  “What thinking your Morgenes does!” Binabik chortled.

     “‘Whatever the truth, they traded blow after blow, clanging and
  hammering on each other’s armor as the sun sank and the ravens fed.
  Neither man could gain an upper hand, even though Camaris’ guard
  had long since been defeated by John’s troop. Still, none of the
  Erkynlanders dared to interfere.
     ‘By chance at last, Camaris’ horse stepped in a hole, breaking its
  leg, and fell with a great scream, trapping the prince beneath it. John
  could have ended it there, and few would have blamed him, but
  instead—observers uniformly swear—he helped the fallen knight of
  Nabban out from under his steed, gave him back his sword, and when
  Camaris proved sound, continued the fight.’”

  “Aedon!” breathed Simon, impressed. He had heard the story, of course,
but it was a different thing entirely to hear it confirmed in the doctor’s wry,
confident words.

     “‘So they struggled on and on until Prester John—who was, after
  all, over twenty years Camaris’ senior—grew weary and stumbled,
  falling to the ground at the feet of the Prince of Nabban.
     ‘Camaris, moved by the power and honor of his opponent, forewent
  slaying him and instead held Thorn at John’s gorget and asked him to
  promise to leave Nabban in peace. John, who had not expected his
  mercy to be repaid in kind, looked around at the field of Nearulagh,
  empty but for his own troops, thought for a moment, and then kicked
  Camaris-sá-Vinitta in the fork of his legs.’”

  “No!” said Simon, taken aback; Qantaqa raised a sleepy head at the
exclamation. Binabik only grinned and continued to read from Morgenes’
writings.

     “‘John then stood in his turn over the sorely wounded Camaris,
  and told him: You have many lessons to learn, but you are a brave and
  noble man, I will do your father and family every courtesy, and take
  good care of your people. I hope in turn you will learn the first lesson,
  the one I have given you today, and that is this: Honor is a wonderful
  thing, but it is a means, not an end. A man who starves with honor
  does not help his family, a king who falls on his sword with honor does
  not save his kingdom.
     ‘When Camaris recovered, so awed was he by his new king that he
  was John’s most faithful follower from that day forward . . .’”

   “Why did you read that to me?” Simon said. He felt more than a little
insulted by the glee that Binabik had displayed while reading about the foul
practices of the greatest hero of Simon’s country . . . still, they had been
Morgenes’ words, and when you thought about them, they made old King
John seem more like a real person, and less like a marble statue of Saint
Sutrin catching dust on the cathedral facade.
    “It seemed to be interesting,” Binabik smiled impishly. “No, that was not
the reason,” he explained quickly as Simon frowned, “truly, I was wanting
you to take a point, and I thought Morgenes could do it with more ease than
I.
    “You did not want to leave the men of Rimmersgard, and I understand
your feeling—it was not, perhaps, the most honorable way of behaving.
Neither, however, was it honorable for me to leave my duties unfulfilled in
Yiqanuc, but sometimes we must go against honor—or, it is to say, against
what is obviously honorable . . . are you understanding me?”
    “Not particularly.” Simon’s frown turned into a mocking, affectionate
smile.
    “Ah.” Binabik gave a philosophical shrug. “Ko muhuhok na mik aqa
nop, we say in Yiqanuc: ‘When it falls on your head, then you are knowing
it is a rock.’”
    Simon pondered this stoically as Binabik returned his cooking things to
his bag.

                                     •••

    Binabik had certainly been right about one thing. As they crested the hill
they could see virtually nothing but the great, dark sweep of Aldheorte
stretching illimitably before them—a green and black ocean frozen a
moment before its waves crashed at the feet of the hills. Oldheart, however,
looked like a sea that the land itself might break against and fail.
    Simon could not help sucking in a deep breath of wonderment. The trees
rolled off and away into the distance until the mist swallowed them, as if
the forest might somehow pass beyond the very boundaries of the earth.
    Binabik, seeing him staring, said: “Of all times when it is important to be
listening to me, this will be it. If we lose each other out there, there may be
no finding again.”
    “I was in the forest before, Binabik.”
    “The fringes, only, friend Simon. Now we are going deeply in.”
    “All the way through?”
    “Ha! No, that would take months—a year, who is knowing? But we are
going far past her borders, so we must hope we are permitted guests.”
    As Simon stared down he felt his skin tingle. The dark, silent trees, the
shadowy pathways that had never known the sound of a footfall . . . all the
stories of a town and castle-dwelling people were just at the fringes of his
imagination, and all too easy to summon.
    But I must go, he told himself. And anyway, I don’t think the forest is evil.
It’s just old . . . very old. And suspicious of strangers—or at least it makes
me feel that way. But not evil.
    “Let’s go,” he said in his clearest, strongest voice, but as Binabik started
down the hill before him Simon made the sign of the Tree on his breast, just
to be on the safe side of things.

                                      •••

    They had made their way down the hill and onto the league of grassy
downs that sloped to Aldheorte’s edge when Qantaqa suddenly stopped,
shaggy head cocked to one side. The sun was high in the sky now, past
noon, and much of the ground-hugging mist had burned away. As Simon
and the troll walked toward the wolf, who crouched motionless as a gray
statue, they looked all around. No movement broke the land’s static
undulation on either side.
    Qantaqa whined as they approached and tilted her head to the other side,
listening. Binabik gently lowered his shoulder bag to the ground, stilling the
quiet clinking of the bones and stones inside, then cocked an ear himself.
    The troll opened his mouth to say something, his hair hanging lank in his
eyes, but before he spoke Simon heard it too: a thin, faint noise, rising and
falling as though a flight of honking geese were passing leagues overhead,
far above the clouds. But it did not seem to come from the sky above—
rather, it sounded as though it rolled down the long corridor between the
forest and the hills, whether from north or south Simon could not say.
    “What . . . ?” he began to ask. Qantaqa whined again and shook her head,
as though she did not like the sound in her ears. The troll raised his small,
brown hand and listened a moment more, then shouldered his bag again,
beckoning Simon to follow him toward the murky breakfront of the forest.
    “Hounds, I am thinking,” he said. The wolf trotted around them in erratic
ovals, moving close and then bounding out again. “I think they are far
away, still, south of the hills . . . upon the Frostmarch. The sooner we are
entering the forest, though, the better. . . .”
    “Perhaps,” Simon said, making good time as he strode along beside the
little man, who was going at a near-trot, “but they didn’t sound like any
hounds that I’ve heard. . . .”
    “That,” Binabik grunted, “is my thought, also . . . and it is also why we
are going quickly as we can.”
    As he thought about what Binabik had said, Simon felt a cold hand
clutch his innards.
    “Stop,” he said, and did.
    “What are you doing?” the little man hissed. “They are still far behind,
but . . .”
    “Call Qantaqa.” Simon stood patiently. Binabik stared at him for a
moment, then whistled for the wolf, who was already trotting back.
    “I hope that you will soon explain . . .” the troll began, but Simon
pointed at Qantaqa.
    “Ride her. Go on, now, get up. If we need to hurry, I can run—but your
legs are too short.”
    “Simon,” Binabik said, anger crinkling his eyes, “I was running on the
slender ridges of Mintahoq when I had only baby-years . . .”
    “But this is flat ground, and downhill. Please, Binabik, you said we
needed to go quickly!”
    The troll stared at him for a moment, then turned and clucked at Qantaqa,
who sank to her stomach in the sparse grass. Binabik threw a leg over her
broad back and pulled himself into place using the thick fur of her hackles
for a pommel. He clucked again and the wolf rose, front feet and then hind,
Binabik swaying on her back.
    “Ummu, Qantaqa,” he snapped; she started forward. Simon lengthened
his pace and began to lope along beside them. They could hear no sound
now beside the noise of their own passage, but the memory of the distant
howling made the back of Simon’s neck prickle, and the dark face of
Aldheorte look more and more like the welcoming smile of a friend.
Binabik leaned low over Qantaqa’s neck, and for a long time would not
meet Simon’s eye.
   Side by side they ran down the long slope. At last, as the flat gray sun
was tipping down toward the hills behind them, they reached the first line
of trees, a cluster of slim birches—pale serving girls ushering visitors into
the house of their dark old master.

                                     •••

   Although the downs outside were bright with slanting sunlight, the
companions found themselves passing quickly into twilit gloom as the trees
rose above them. The soft forest floor cushioned their footfalls, and they ran
silently as ghosts through the sparse outer woods. Columns of light speared
down through the branches, and the dust of their passage rose behind them
to hang sparkling between the shadows.
   Simon was tiring rapidly, sweat running down his face and neck in dirty
rivulets.
   “Farther we must go,” Binabik called to him from the pitching platform
of Qantaqa’s back. “Soon enough the way will be too tangled for speed, and
the light too dim. Then we will rest.”
   Simon said nothing but only dug on, his breath burning in his lungs.
   When the boy slowed at last to an unsteady canter, Binabik slipped down
from the wolf’s back and ran at his side. The angling sun was sliding up the
tree trunks around them, the forest floor darkening even as the upper
branches took on shining haloes, like the colored windows of the Hayholt’s
chapel. At last, as the ground before them disappeared in darkness, Simon
tripped over a half-buried stone; when Binabik caught him up at the elbow,
he held on.
   “Sit, now,” the troll said. Simon slid to the ground without a word,
feeling the loose soil give slightly beneath him. A moment later Qantaqa
circled back. After sniffing the immediate area, she sat down and began to
lick the perspiration from the back of Simon’s neck; it tickled, but Simon
was too exhausted to do much of anything about it.
   Binabik crouched on his haunches, examining their stopping place. They
were partway down a small slope, at the bottom of which snaked a muddy
streambed with a dark trickle of water at its center.
   “When you are again breathing,” he said, “I think we might be moving
just there.” With his finger he indicated a spot slightly uphill where a great
oak stood, its tangle of roots warding off the encroachment of other trees so
that there was a stone’s throw of clear ground on all sides of its massive,
gnarled trunk. Simon nodded, still laboring for breath. After a while, he
dragged himself to his feet and moved with the little man up the slope to the
tree.
   “Do you know where we are?” Simon asked as he sank down to place his
back against one of the looping, half-buried roots.
   “No,” said Binabik cheerfully. “But tomorrow when the sun is up and I
have time for doing certain things . . . then I will. Now help me find some
stones and sticks and we will be having a bit of fire. And later,” Binabik
rose from his crouch and began foraging for deadwood in the fast-fading
daylight, “later there will be a pleasant surprise for you.”

                                     •••

   Binabik had built a sort of three-sided box of stones around the fire pit to
shield its light, but still it crackled in a most heartening manner. The red
gleam cast odd shadows as Binabik rooted in his bag. Simon watched a few
lonely sparks spiral upward.
   They had made themselves a meager dinner of dried fish, hard cakes, and
water. Simon did not feel he had treated his stomach as well as he would
have liked, but it was still better to be lying here warming the dull ache in
his legs than to be running. He could not remember a time when he had
ever run so long or so far without stopping.
   “Ha!” Binabik chortled, lifting his firelight-tinted face from his bag in
triumph. “A surprise I was promising you, Simon, and a surprise I have!”
   “A pleasant surprise, you said. I’ve had enough of the other kind to last
for my whole life.”
   Binabik grinned, his round face seeming to stretch back toward his ears.
“Very well, it is for you to decide. Have a try of this.” He handed Simon a
small ceramic jar.
   “What is it?” Simon held it up to the fire. It felt solid, but the jar had no
markings. “Some troll-thing?”
   “Open it.”
   Simon stuck his finger into the top and found it was sealed with
something that felt like wax. He scraped a hole through, then brought it up
to his nose for a tentative sniff. A moment later he pushed his finger in,
pulled it out, and stuck it in his mouth.
    “Jam!” he said, delighted.
    “Made from grapes, I am sure,” Binabik said, pleased by Simon’s
response. “Some I found at the abbey, but the excitement of late had driven
it from my mind.”
    After eating several dollops, Simon reluctantly passed it to Binabik, who
also found it rather pleasant. Within a short while they had finished it off,
leaving Qantaqa the sticky jar to lick.
    Simon curled himself in his cloak beside the warm stones of the dying
fire. “Could you sing a song, Binabik?” he asked, “or tell a story?”
    The troll looked over. “I am thinking not a story, Simon, for we need to
sleep and rise early. Perhaps a short song.”
    “That would be fine.”
    “But, after thinking again,” Binabik said, tugging his hood up around his
ears, “I would like to be hearing you sing a song. A quiet singing, of
course.”
    “Me? A song?” Simon pondered. Through a chink in the trees he thought
he could see the faint glimmer of a star. A star . . . “Well, then,” he said,
“since you sang your song for me, about Sedda and the blanket of stars . . . I
suppose I can sing one that the chambermaids taught me when I was a
child.” He moved around a bit, making himself more comfortable. “I hope I
remember all the words. It’s a funny song.”

        “In the Oldheart’s deep dell,”

  Simon began softly,

               “Jack Mundwode did yell
               To his men of the woods near and far,
               He offered a crown, and the forest’s renown
               To the one who could catch him a star.

               Beornoth stood first time, and he shouted: ‘I’ll climb
               To the top of the highest of trees!
               And I’ll snatch that star down for the fair golden crown
That will soon belong only to me.’

So he climbed up a birch to the highest high perch
Then he leaped to an old, tall yew.
But as much as he jumped, and he leaped and he bumped
Reach the star, that he never could do.

Next gay Osgal stood, and he promised he would
Loose an arrow up into the sky.
‘I will knock that star free so it falls down to me
And the crown will be mine by and by . . .’

Twenty arrows he shot. Not a single one caught
On the star that hung mocking above.
As the arrows fell back Osgal hid behind Jack
Who chuckled and gave him a shove.

Now all the men sought, and they quarreled and fought
And they had not a pinch of success,
Till the fair Hruse rose, and she looked down her nose
At the men as she smoothed out her dress.

‘Tis a small enough task for Jack Mundwode to ask,’
She said with a gleam in her eye,
‘But if none of you here hold a gold crown that dear
I will seek Mundwode’s knot to untie.’

Then she took up a net which she’d bade the men get
And she cast it full into the lake.
So the water did roil, and it almost did spoil
The reflection the bright star did make.

But then after a while she turned ’round with a smile,
Said to Jack: ‘Do you see what’s about?
It is there in my net, all caught up and quite wet
If you want it, then you pull it out.’
              Old Jack laughed and he shouted to all those who crowded
              ‘Here’s the woman I must take to wife.
              For she’s taken my crown, and she’s brought my star down
              So I might as well give her my life.’
              Yes, she’s taken the crown, and she’s brought the star down
              So Jack Mundwode has took her to wife . . .”

   From the darkness he could hear Binabik laugh, quietly and easily.
   “A song of enjoyment, Simon. Thanks to you.”
   Soon the hissing of the embers quieted, and the only sound was the soft
breathing of the wind through the endless trees.

                                    •••

   Before he opened his eyes he was aware of a strange droning noise,
rising and falling close to where he lay. He lifted his head, feeling sticky
with sleep, to see Binabik sitting cross-legged before the fire. The sun had
not been up long; the forest around them was draped in tendrils of pale mist.
   Binabik had carefully placed a circle of feathers around the fire pit,
feathers of many different birds, as though he had scavenged them from the
surrounding woods. Eyes closed, he leaned toward the small fire and
chanted in his native language, the sound that had pulled Simon to
wakefulness.
   “. . . Tutusik-Ahyuq-Chuyuq-Qachimak, Tutusik-Ahyuk-Chuyuq-
Qaqimak . . .” On and on he went. The slender ribbon of smoke that rose
from the campfire began to waver, as though in a strong breeze, but the tiny
feathers lay flat on the ground, unmoving. With his eyes still closed, the
troll began to move the palm of his hand in a flat circle over the fire; the
ribbon of smoke bent as though pushed, and began to stream steadily away
across one corner of the pit. Binabik opened his eyes and looked for a
moment at the smoke, then stopped the circling movement of his small
hand. A moment later the smoke resumed its normal motion.
   Simon had been holding his breath. He let it out. “Do you know where
we are now?” he asked. Binabik turned and smiled, pleased.
   “Morning greetings. Yes, I think I am knowing to a nicety. We should be
having little trouble—but much walking—to get to Geloë’s house . . .”
   “House?” Simon asked. “A house in the Aldheorte? What’s it like?”
   “Ah,” Binabik straightened his legs and rubbed at his calves, “it is not
like any house you . . .” He stopped, and sat staring over Simon’s shoulder,
transfixed. The youth whirled in alarm, but there was nothing to see.
   “What is it?”
   “Hush . . .” Binabik continued to gaze out. “There. Are you hearing?”
After a moment, he did hear it: the distant baying they had marked in their
journey across the downs to the forest. Simon felt his skin crawl.
   “The hounds again . . . !” he said. “But it sounds as though they’re still
far away.”
   “You are not understanding yet.” Binabik looked down at the fire pit,
then up at the morning light bleeding down through the treetops. “They
have passed us in the night. They have run all night! And now, unless my
ears are playing tricks at me, they have turned back toward us.”
   “Whose hounds?” Simon felt his palms go moist with sweat, and rubbed
them on his cloak. “Are they following us? They can’t hunt us in the forest,
can they?”
   Binabik scattered the feathers with a scuff of his small boot and began
packing his shoulder bag. “I do not know,” he said. “I am not knowing the
answer to any of those questions. There is power in the forest that might
confuse hunting hounds—ordinary hounds. It is doubtful, however, that any
local baron out for sport would be running his dogs through all the night,
and I have not heard of dogs that could do so.”
   Binabik called Qantaqa. Simon sat up and hurriedly pulled his boots on.
He felt sore all over, and now he felt sure he would be running again.
   “It’s Elias, isn’t it?” he said grimly, wincing as he pushed his blistered
foot down into the boot heel.
   “Perhaps.” Qantaqa trotted up, and Binabik threw a leg over her back,
pulling himself up. “But what is making a doctor’s helper so important to
him—and where is the king finding hounds that can run twenty leagues
between dusk and sunrise?” Binabik put the pack on Qantaqa’s shoulders
before him, and handed Simon his walking stick. “Do not lose this, please. I
wish we had found a horse for your riding.”
   The pair started down the slope to the gulley, then up the far side.
   “Are they close?” Simon asked. “How far is . . . this house?”
   “Neither hounds nor house are nearby,” Binabik said. “Well, I shall be
running beside you as soon as Qantaqa is tiring. Kikkasut!” he swore, “how
I am wishing for a horse!”
   “Me, too,” Simon panted.

                                    •••

   They trekked on through the morning, eastward into deeper forest. As
they went up and down the rocky dells the baying behind them faded for
long minutes, then returned seemingly louder than ever. As good as his
word, Binabik jumped down from Qantaqa when the wolf began to flag and
trotted along beside, his short legs carrying him two steps for Simon’s every
one, his teeth bared as his cheeks puffed in and out.
   They stopped to drink water and rest as the sun neared midmorning.
Simon tore strips from his two packages to bandage his blistered heels, then
handed the bundles to Binabik so he could put them in the pack: Simon
could no longer stand to feel them rattling against his thigh as he walked
and ran. As they sloshed the last musky drops from the waterbag in their
cheeks and tried to regain their straining breath, the sounds of pursuit came
up again. This time the unmistakable clamor of the hounds was so much
nearer that they immediately lurched into motion once more.
   Within a short while they began to ascend a long rise. The ground was
becoming increasingly rocky as it mounted upward, and even the types of
trees seemed to be changing. Staggering up the hilly slope, Simon felt a
sickening sense of defeat spread through his body like a poison. Binabik
had told him it would be late in the afternoon at least before they reached
this Geloë, yet they were already losing the race, with the sun not risen to
noon above the sheltering trees. The noise of their pursuers was constant, an
excited howling so loud that Simon could not help wondering, even as he
stumbled up the daunting slope, where they found the breath to run and
bark at once. What kind of hounds were they? Simon’s heart beat as fast as
a bird’s wings. He and the troll would get to face the hunters soon enough.
The thought made him feel sick.
   At last a slender patch of sky could be seen through the standing trunks
on the horizon: the top of the rise. They limped past the final line of trees.
Qantaqa, who ran before them, stopped abruptly and barked, a sharp, high
pitched sound from deep in her throat.
   “Simon!” Binabik shouted and threw himself to the ground, knocking the
boy’s legs from beneath him so he tumbled down with a huff of punched-
out breath. When the black tunnel of Simon’s vision widened a moment
later, he was lying on his elbows looking down a craggy rock face into a
deep canyon. A cluster of fragments broke loose from the stone beneath his
hand and hopped and tumbled down the sheer wall to disappear into the
green treetops far below.
   The baying was like the brazen flare of war trumpets. Simon and the troll
edged themselves away from the canyon’s edge, a few feet back down the
slope, and stood.
   “Look!” Simon hissed, his bleeding hands and chin of no import now.
“Binabik, look!” He pointed back down the long slope they had just
climbed, through the clinging blanket of trees.
   Passing in and out of the clearings, far, far less than half a league behind,
was a flurry of low white shapes: the hounds.
   Binabik took his stick from Simon and twisted it into halves. He shook
out his darts and handed the knife end to Simon.
   “Quickly,” he said. “Cut yourself a tree branch, a cudgel. If selling our
lives we must be, let us keep the price high.”
   The throaty voices of the dogs boiled up the hillside, a rising song of the
closing and the kill.