
                          The Secret Lake




He hacked and chipped frantically, bending the limb down with his
full weight, the knife slippery in his trembling fingers. It took Simon many
costly seconds to cut loose a branch that would suit him—pathetic defense
though it would be—and every second brought the hounds nearer. The limb
that he finally snapped off was as long as his arm, knobbed at one end
where another branch had fallen away.
   The troll was rummaging in his backpack, one hand clutching the heavy
fur at Qantaqa’s neck.
   “Hold her!” he called to Simon. “If she is let go now, she will attack too
soon. They will drag her down and be quickly killing her.” Simon crouched
with an arm around the wolf’s broad neck. She was trembling with
excitement, heart beating beneath his arm. Simon felt his own heart
speeding in tandem—this was all so unreal! Just this morning he and
Binabik had been sitting calmly beside the fire. . . .
   The cry of the pack intensified; they came surging up the hill like white
termites fleeing a crumbling nest. Qantaqa lunged forward, dragging Simon
to his knees.
   “Hinik Aia!” Binabik shouted, and flicked at her nose with his hollow
bone tube, then dropped it as he pulled a length of rope from the bottom of
his bag and began to make a noose. Simon, thinking he understood, looked
over the canyon’s edge behind them and shook his head despairingly. It was
much too far to the bottom, more than twice as far as Binabik’s rope could
reach down the sheer rock face. Then he saw something, and felt hope still
struggling inside him.
   “Binabik, look!” he pointed. The troll, despite the impossibility of a
climb down, was looping his rope around a stump anchored not a yard from
the canyon’s edge. As he finished he looked up to follow Simon’s pointing
finger.
   Less than a hundred paces from where they crouched a huge old hemlock
lay tipped downward, its bottom end balanced on the near lip, the tip lodged
halfway down the far canyon wall, caught on a jutting ledge.
   “We can climb across to the far side!” Simon said. But the troll shook his
head.
   “If we can climb down it with Qantaqa, then they can be doing it as well.
And it goes to nowhere.” He gestured. The ledge where the tree had caught
was no more than a wide shelf in the rock face. “But it will be some help.”
He stood up and tugged at the rope, testing the knot around the stump.
“Take Qantaqa down onto it, if you can. Not far, perhaps ten cubits only.
Hold her until I am calling, understood!?”
   “But . . .” Simon began, then looked back down the slope. The white
shapes, perhaps a dozen in all, were almost upon them. He grabbed the
balking Qantaqa by the scruff of the neck and urged her toward the fallen
hemlock.
   Enough of the tree had remained on the canyon’s edge that there was
space between the twisting roots and the rock rim. It was not easy to keep
balance while clinging to the wolf. She shivered and pulled back, growling;
the noise was almost subsumed in the clamor of the approaching hounds.
He could not coax her up onto the broad trunk, and turned to Binabik in
despair.
   “Ummu!” the troll called hoarsely, and a moment later she jumped up
onto the hemlock, still growling. Simon straddled the trunk as best he could,
his club a hindrance in his belt. He slid backward on his rump, keeping a
grip on Qantaqa, until he was well out from the canyon’s rim. Just then the
troll cried out, and Qantaqa whirled toward the sound of his voice. Simon
hung on to her neck with both arms as his knees gripped the rough bark. He
was suddenly cold, so cold! He lowered his face into her fur, smelled her
thick, wild smell, and whispered a prayer.
   “. . . Elysia, mother of our Ransomer, give mercy, protect us . . .”
    Binabik was standing with a coil of rope in his hand just a step before the
rim. “Hinik, Qantaqa!” he called, and then the hounds were out of the trees
and up the final slope.
    Simon could not really see much of them from where he sat holding the
straining wolf—only long, thin white backs and sharp ears. The beasts
moved toward the troll at a gallop, making a noise like metal chains
dragged on a slate floor.
    What is Binabik doing? Simon thought, panic making it hard for him to
breathe. Why doesn’t he run, why doesn’t he use his darts—something?!
    It was like the recurrence of his worst nightmare, like Morgenes in
flames standing between Simon and the deadly hand of Elias. He couldn’t
sit and watch Binabik killed before his eyes. As he started to pull himself
forward, the dogs leaped toward the troll.
    Simon had only a moment’s impression of long, pale snouts, of empty,
pearl-white eyes, and a flare of red curving tongues and red mouths . . . then
Binabik jumped backward, down into the canyon.
    “No!” Simon shrieked, horrified. The five or six creatures that had been
nearest lunged forward, unable to stop, and tumbled over the cliff in a
squealing tangle of white legs and tails. Helpless, Simon watched the clot of
whinnying dogs bounce against the steep rock face and plummet down into
the trees far below with an explosive popping of broken branches. He felt
another choking scream rise in his breast . . .
    “Now, Simon! Let her go!”
    Mouth agape, Simon looked down to see Binabik’s feet braced against
the canyon wall, the troll hanging suspended from the rope about his waist
not two dozen feet below the spot where he had jumped. “Let her go!” he
called again, and Simon finally uncurled his restraining arm from Qantaqa’s
neck. The remainder of the dogs were milling at the rim above Binabik’s
head, sniffing the ground and staring down, barking savagely at the little
man who hung so frustratingly near.
    As Qantaqa made her cautious way back up the hemlock’s broad back,
one of the white hounds turned tiny eyes like fogged mirrors toward the tree
and Simon, letting out a great rasping snarl as he hurried forward; the other
quickly followed.
    Before the yammering pack reached the hemlock, the gray wolf
negotiated the last steps, reaching the rim with a magnificent leap. The first
dog was on her in a heartbeat, two more right behind. The snarling battle
song of the wolf rose, a deeper note among the barking and howling of the
hounds.
    Simon, frozen for a moment of indecision, began inching forward toward
the edge of the rim. The trunk was so broad that his spread legs ached, and
he considered getting up to his knees to crawl forward, sacrificing his clutch
on the tree for speed. For the first time he turned his gaze straight down.
The tops of the trees were a bumpy green carpet far below. The distance
was dizzying, much farther than the leap from the wall to Green Angel
Tower. His head reeled and he looked away, deciding to keep his knees
right where they were. As he looked up, a white shape bounded from the
canyon’s edge onto the wide hemlock.
    The hound growled and drove forward, talons catching at the bark.
Simon had only an instant to pull out his knotted branch before the beast
crossed the dozen or so feet and dove for his throat. For a moment the
branch caught in his belt, but he had pushed it in narrow-end-down, which
saved his life.
    As the club came free, the dog was upon him. Yellow teeth gleamed as it
bit at his face. He got the branch up high enough to strike a glancing blow,
turning the dog’s lunge so that the teeth snapped on air an inch from his left
ear, spraying him with saliva. Its paws were on his chest, and the awful
carrion-stench of its breath blew in his face; he was losing his hold. He tried
to pull the club back up, but it caught between the animal’s extended front
legs. He leaned back as the long, snarling muzzle once more snaked toward
his face, and tried to twist the branch free. There was a moment of
resistance, then one of the white hound’s paws was knocked from his
shoulder and the beast overbalanced. It squealed and tumbled away,
scrabbling for a moment at the bark, then pulling the club from his hand as
it slid from the tree trunk to fall end over end down into the canyon.
    Simon sank forward, catching at the tree with his hands, and coughed,
trying to drive the fetid breath of the thing out of his nostrils. He was cut
short by a low growl. He lifted his head slowly to see another hound
standing on the log just below the roots, milky eyes glinting like a blind
beggar’s. It bared its teeth in a frothing, crimson-tongued grin. Simon
hopelessly lifted his empty hands as the beast padded slowly down the
trunk, ropy muscles bunching beneath the short fur.
   The hound turned to nip at its flank, worrying the skin for a moment,
then returned its eerie, vacant gaze to Simon. It took another step, wobbled,
took one shaky step more, then folded in place to slide off the hemlock into
oblivion.
   “The black dart seemed the safest,” Binabik called. The little man stood a
few yards down slope from the tree’s ball of dried roots. A moment later
Qantaqa limped up to stand at his side, her muzzle dripping with dark red
blood. Simon stared, slowly realizing that they had survived.
   “Go slowly, now,” the troll called. “Here, I will throw the rope. It would
be bad sense to lose you after all we were going through . . .” The rope
arced out and fell slithering across the log where Simon sat. He took it
gratefully, his hands shaking as though with palsy.

                                      •••

   Binabik laboriously turned the dog over with his foot. It was one he had
killed with a dart: the cotton wadding sprouted from the smooth white fur of
the creature’s neck like a tiny mushroom.
   “See there,” the troll said. Simon leaned a little closer. It was not like any
hunting hound he had ever seen: the slender muzzle and underslung jaw
reminded him more of the sharks that fishermen pulled thrashing from the
Kynslagh. The opalescent white eyes, now staring sightlessly, seemed
windows of some inner disease.
   “No, look there.” Binabik pointed. On the dog’s chest, burned black
through the short hairs, was a slender triangle with a narrow base. It was a
branded mark, like the kind that the Thrithings-men burnt into the flanks of
their horses with flame-heated spears.
   “That sign is for Stormspike,” Binabik said quietly. “It is the mark of the
Norns.”
   “And they are . . . ?”
   “A strange people. Their country is north even of Yiqanuc and
Rimmersgard. A great mountain is there—very tall and with a covering of
snow and ice—called Stormspike by the Rimmersmen. The Norns do not
travel in the fields of Osten Ard. Some are saying that they are Sithi, but I
do not know if that is truth.”
   “How can that be?” Simon asked. “Look at the collar.” He leaned down,
gingerly pushing a finger under the white leather to lift it away from the
stiffening flesh of the dead hound.
   Binabik smiled sheepishly. “Shame to me! I overlooked the collar, white
against white as it is—me, taught since child-age to hunt in snow!”
   “But look at it,” Simon urged. “See the buckle?”
   The buckle of the collar was indeed an interesting thing: a piece of
hammered silver in the shape of a coiling dragon.
   “That’s the dragon of Elias’ kennels,” Simon said firmly. “I should know
—I used to visit Tobas the houndkeeper often.”
   Binabik crouched, staring at the carcass. “I believe you. And as for the
mark of Stormspike, it is only necessary to look for seeing that these dogs
are not things raised in your Hayholt.” He stood up and stepped back a
pace; Qantaqa moved in to sniff at the body, then quickly backed away with
a rumbling growl.
   “A mystery whose solving must wait,” the troll said. “Now we are very
lucky to have our lives, with all of our limbs as well. We should be moving
again. I have no wish to meet this hound’s master.”
   “Are we close to Geloë?”
   “Somewhat we have been driven off our route, but not beyond repairing.
If we leave now, we should still outrun the darkness.”
   Simon looked down at the long snout and vicious jaw of the hound, at its
powerful body and filming eye. “I hope so,” he said.

                                    •••

   They could find no way to cross the canyon anywhere, and reluctantly
decided to move back down the long slope and look for another, easier
descent than the sheer rock face before them. Simon was almost childishly
happy not to have to climb down: his knees still felt as weak as if he’d had a
fever. He had no wish to look down into the canyon’s maw again with
nothing beneath him but a long, long fall. It was one thing to climb the
walls and towers of the Hayholt, with their square corners and mason’s
cracks—a tree trunk suspended like a frail twig over nothingness was
another story entirely.
   At the base of the long slope an hour later they turned to their right hand
and began to track around to the northwest. They had not gone more than
five furlongs when a high-pitched, wailing cry knifed through the afternoon
air. They both stopped short; Qantaqa pricked her ears and growled. The
sound came again.
   “It sounds like a child screaming,” Simon declared, turning his head to
locate the noise’s source.
   “The forest is often playing such tricks,” Binabik began. The keening
noise rose again. Quickly afterward came an angry baying that they knew
all too well.
   “Qinkipa’s Eyes!” Binabik cursed. “Will they chase us all the way to
Naglimund!?” The baying rose again, and he listened. “It has the sound of
one dog only, however. That is something lucky.”
   “It sounds like it’s coming from down there.” Simon pointed to where
the trees grew more densely some distance away. “Let’s go and see.”
   “Simon!” Binabik’s voice was harsh with surprise. “What thing are you
saying? We are fleeing to keep our lives!”
   “You said it sounded like only one. We have Qantaqa. Someone is being
attacked. How can we run away?”
   “Simon, we do not know if that crying is a trick . . . or an animal it could
be.”
   “What if it isn’t?” Simon demanded. “What if that thing has caught some
woodsman’s child . . . or . . . or something?”
   “A woodsman’s child? This far from the forest’s edge?” Binabik stared at
him in frustration for a moment. Simon returned the gaze defiantly. “Ha!”
Binabik said heavily. “So it will be, then, as you are wishing.”
   Simon turned and began jogging down toward the thickening trees.
   “‘Mikmok hanno so gijiq,’ we say in Yiqanuc!” Binabik called. “‘If you
wish to carry a hungry weasel in your pocket, it is your choice!” The youth
did not look back. Binabik slapped the ground with his walking stick, then
trotted after him.
   He caught up to Simon within a hundred paces; within twenty more he
had opened his staff to shake loose his dart bag. He hissed a command to
bring the racing Qantaqa back, then deftly rolled coarse wool around one of
the dark-tipped darts as he ran.
   “Couldn’t you get poisoned if you tripped and fell?” Simon asked.
Binabik shot him a sour, worried look as he struggled to keep up.
   When they came upon the scene at last, its appearance was deceptively
innocent: a dog crouching before a spreading ash tree, staring up at a dark
shape huddled on a branch overhead. It might have been one of the Hayholt
castle hounds with a treed cat, except that both dog and quarry were far
larger.
   They were less than a hundred paces away when the dog turned toward
them. It skinned back its lips and barked, a vicious, raw bray of sound. It
looked back at the tree for a moment, then straightened long legs and loped
toward them. Binabik slowed and stopped, raising his hollow tube to his
lips; Qantaqa trotted past him. As the hound closed the gap, the troll puffed
out his cheeks and blew. If the dart struck, the dog gave no sign; instead it
sped forward, growling, and Qantaqa charged to meet it. This hound was
even bigger than the others, as large or even a little larger than Qantaqa
herself.
   The two animals did not circle, but flung themselves together, jaws
snapping; a moment later they tumbled to the ground snarling, a heaving,
spinning ball of gray and white fur. At Simon’s side Binabik cursed sharply;
his leather packet fell from his hand in his haste to wind another dart. The
ivory needles scattered into the leaves and moss underfoot.
   The snarls of the combatants had risen to a higher pitch. The long white
head of the hound lunged in and out: once, twice, thrice, like a striking
viper. The last time it came back with blood on its pale muzzle.
   Simon and the troll were trotting toward them when Binabik made a
strange choking noise.
   “Qantaqa!” he cried, and sped forward. Simon saw the flash of Binabik’s
bone-handled blade, then a moment later, incredibly, the troll cast himself
onto the writhing, snapping animals and brought the knife down, raised it,
and struck again. Simon, fearing for the lives of both his companions,
snatched the hollow tube from where Binabik had dropped it and ran
forward. He arrived in time to see the troll brace himself, grab the thick
gray fur of Qantaqa’s back, and pull. The two animals slid apart; there was
blood on each of them. Qantaqa slowly stood, favoring a leg. The white
hound lay silent.
    Binabik crouched and put an arm around the wolf’s neck, pressing his
forehead to hers. Simon, oddly touched, walked away from them to the tree.
    The first surprise was that there were two figures up in the branches of
the white ash: a wide-eyed youth who held a smaller, silent figure in his lap.
The second surprise was that Simon knew the larger of the two.
    “It’s you!” He stared up in astonishment at the grime-streaked and
bloody face. “You! Mal . . . Malachias!”
    The boy said nothing, but gazed down with haunted eyes, gently rocking
the small figure in his lap. For a moment the forest copse was silent and
unmoving, as though the afternoon sun above the trees had been arrested in
its progress. Then the blare of a horn shattered the quiet.
    “Quickly!” Simon called up to Malachias. “Down! You must come
down!” Binabik came up behind him with the limping Qantaqa.
    “Huntsman’s horn, I am sure,” was all he said.
    Malachias, as if comprehending at last, began sliding up the long branch
toward the trunk, holding his small companion carefully. When he reached
the crotch, he hesitated a moment, then handed the limp burden down to
Simon. It was a little dark-haired girl, aged no more than ten years. She was
unmoving, eyes closed in her too-pale face; when Simon took her, he felt
something sticky all across the front of her rough dress. A moment later
Malachias lowered himself down from the branch, falling the last few feet
and tumbling, getting up almost immediately.
    “What now?” Simon asked, trying to balance the little girl against his
chest. The horn echoed again somewhere on the canyon rim they had left
behind, and now there rose the excited squalling of more hounds as well.
    “We cannot fight men, and dogs along with them,” the troll said,
exhaustion plain on his slack face. “Horses we cannot outrun. We must hide
ourselves.”
    “How?” Simon demanded. “The dogs will smell us.”
    Binabik leaned forward and took Qantaqa’s injured paw in his small
hand, bending it back and forth. The wolf resisted for a moment, then sat,
panting, as the little man finished his manipulations.
    “Painful it is, but not broken,” he told Simon, then turned to speak to the
wolf. Malachias lifted his gaze from Simon’s burden to stare. “Chok,
Qantaqa my brave friend,” the troll said, “ummu chok Geloë!”
   The wolf rumbled deep in her chest, then leaped away at once to the
northwest, away from the rising clamor behind them. Favoring the bloodied
front leg, she was gone from view among the trees in a matter of moments.
   “I am hoping,” Binabik explained, “that the confusion of scents here,” he
gestured to the tree, and then to the huge hound lying nearby, “will distract
them, and that the scent they will follow may be Qantaqa’s. I think they
cannot catch her, even lamed—too smart she is.”
   Simon looked around. “How about there?” he asked, pointing to a
crevice in the hillside formed by a great rectangle of streaked stone that had
broken loose and fallen back, as though split by a vast wedge.
   “Except that we do not know which direction they will take,” Binabik
said. “If they come down the hillside, that will be luck for us. If they are
descending farther back, they will ride right past the hole there. Too much
risk.”
   Simon found it hard to think. The din of the approaching hounds was
fearsome. Was Binabik right? Were they to be chased all the way to
Naglimund? Not that they could run much longer, weary and battered as
they were.
   “There!” he said, suddenly. Another finger of rock thrust up through the
forest floor some distance away, three times the height of a man. Trees grew
close about its base, surrounding it like young children helping their
grandfather hobble to the supper table.
   “If we can climb up that,” Simon said, “we will be above even the ones
on horses!”
   “Yes,” Binabik said, nodding his head. “Right, you are right. Come, let
us climb.” He made for the outcropping, the silent Malachias just behind
him. Simon readjusted the little girl against his body and hurried after.
   Binabik scrambled up partway, and clung to the branch of a close-leaning
tree as he turned. “Pass the little one to me.”
   Simon did, extending his arms to their full reach, then turned to put a
guiding hand on the elbow of Malachias, who was looking for an initial
toehold. The boy shook off Simon’s helpful gesture and climbed carefully
upward.
   Simon was last. When he got to the first ledge he picked up the still
figure of the little girl and gently slung her over his shoulder, then made his
way up to the rock’s rounded top. He lay down with the others among the
leaves and twigs, hidden from the ground by a screen of branches. His heart
thudded from exhaustion and fear. He had, it seemed, been running and
hiding forever.
    Even as they squirmed, trying to find comfortable positions for all four
bodies, the yammering of the dogs rose to a hideous pitch; a moment later
the woods below were full of darting white shapes.
    Simon left the little girl clutched in Malachias’ arms and quietly pulled
himself forward until he could join Binabik at the outcropping’s edge,
peering with the troll through a gap in the foliage. The dogs were
everywhere, sniffing, barking; there were at least a score of them running
excitedly back and forth between the tree, the body of their fellow, and the
base of the outcropping. One of them even seemed to stare directly up at
Simon and Binabik, empty white eyes gleaming, red mouth grinning
fiercely. A moment later it trotted back to join its lathered companions.
    The horn sounded nearby. Within a minute a line of horses appeared,
picking their way down the densely wooded hillside. Now the dogs had a
fourth corner to their circuit, and ran braying between the stone-gray legs of
the lead horse, who walked on as calmly as if they were moths. The trailing
horses were not quite so sanguine; one immediately behind shied a little,
and its master cut it out of line, spurring it down the last short slope to bring
it to a pacing, sputtering halt near the outcropping.
    This rider was young and clean-shaven, with a strong chin and curling
hair the color of his chestnut horse. He wore a blue and black surcoat over
his silvery armor, with a design of three yellow flowers set diagonally from
shoulder to waist. His expression was sour.
    “Another one dead,” he spat. “What do you make of this, Jegger?” His
voice took on a sarcastic tone. “Oh, pardon me, I meant Master Ingen.”
    Simon was amazed at how clear the man’s words were, as though he
spoke directly to the hidden listeners. He held his breath.
    The armored man was staring at something out of their view, and his
profile suddenly seemed very familiar. Simon felt sure he had seen this man
somewhere, most likely at the Hayholt. He was certainly an Erkynlander, by
his accent.
    “It is not important what you call me,” another voice said, a deep,
smooth, cold voice. “You did not make Ingen Jegger master of this hunt.
You are here as . . . courtesy, Heahferth. Because these are your lands.”
   Simon realized that the first man was Baron Heahferth, a regular at Elias’
court and a crony of Earl Fengbald. The second speaker rode his gray horse
into the gap through which Simon and Binabik stared. Agitated white dogs
twined in and out around the horse’s hooves.
   The man called Ingen was dressed all in black, his surcoat, breeches and
shirt all the same bleak, lusterless shade. At first he looked to be white-
bearded; a moment later it was apparent that the close-cropped whiskers on
the hard face were a yellow so light as to be nearly colorless—as colorless
as his eyes, faint pale spots in his dark face. They might be blue.
   Simon stared at the cold face framed in the black coif, at the powerful,
thick-muscled body, and felt a fear different than any he had felt this whole
dangerous day. Who was this man? He looked like a Rimmersman, his
name was a Rimmersgard name, but he spoke strangely, with slow, strange
accents Simon had never heard.
   “My lands ended at the forest’s edge,” Heahferth said, and turned his
balking mount back into place. Half a dozen men in light armor had filed
down into the clearing behind and sat their horses, waiting. “And where my
lands ended,” Heahferth continued, “my patience did, too. This is a farce.
Dead dogs scattered about like chaff . . .”
   “And two prisoners escaped,” Ingen finished heavily.
   “Prisoners!” Heahferth scoffed. “A little boy and girl! Do you think these
are the traitors Elias is so anxious to get? Do you think such a pair,” he
tipped his head toward the carcass of the great hound, “did that?”
   “The dogs have been chasing something.” Ingen Jegger stared down at
the dead mastiff. “Look. Look at the wounds. This was no bear, no wolf that
did this. It is our quarry, and he is still running. And now, thanks to your
stupidity, our prisoners are running, also.”
   “How dare you?!” Baron Heahferth said, his voice rising. “How dare
you?! With one word I could have you sprouting arrows like a hedgehog.”
   Ingen looked slowly up from the body of the hound. “But you will not,”
he said quietly. Heahferth’s horse shied back, rearing, and when the baron
had mastered him the two men stared at each other for a moment.
   “Oh . . . very well, then,” Heahferth said. A different note had crept into
his voice as he looked away from the black-clad man to stare out across the
forest. “What now?”
   “The dogs have a scent,” Ingen said. “We will do what we must do.
Follow.” He raised the horn that swung at his side and winded it once. The
dogs, who had been swarming about at the edge of the clearing gave throat
and sped off in the direction Qantaqa had disappeared; Ingen Jegger spurred
his tall gray horse after them without a word. Baron Heahferth, cursing,
waved to his men and followed. Within the course of a hundred heartbeats
the woods below the outcropping were empty and silent once more, but
Binabik kept them all in place for some time before he would let them
climb down.
   Once on the ground, he quickly examined the little girl, opening her eyes
with a delicate, stubby finger, leaning close to listen to her breathing.
   “Very bad she is, this one. What is her name, Malachias?”
   “Leleth,” the boy said, staring at the pale face. “My sister.”
   “Our only hope is to quickly get her to the house of Geloë,” Binabik said.
“And hope also that Qantaqa has led those men astray, so that we are
reaching it alive.”
   “What are you doing out here, Malachias!?” Simon demanded. “And
how did you get away from Heahferth?” The boy did not answer, and when
Simon asked again he turned his head away.
   “Questions for later,” Binabik said, standing. “Quickness we need now.
Can you carry this girlchild, Simon?”
   They made their way northwest through the dense forest, the lowering
sun lancing through the branches. Simon asked the troll about the man
named Ingen and his odd way of speaking.
   “Black Rimmersman, I am thinking,” Binabik said. “They are a rare lot,
not often seen except at northernmost settlements where they sometimes
come to trade. They do not speak the language of Rimmersgard. It is said
they live on the fringes of the lands belonging to the Norns.”
   “The Norns again,” Simon grunted, ducking beneath a branch that had
sprung from Malachias’ careless hand. He turned to confront the troll.
“What is going on?! Why should such people be concerned with us?”
   “Perilous times, friend Simon,” Binabik said. “Through perilous times
we are passing.”

                                    •••
   Several hours went by and the shadows of afternoon grew longer and
longer. The patches of sky that glimmered through the treetops turned
slowly from blue to shell pink. The three walked on. The land was mostly
level, from time to time sloping away like a shallow beggar’s bowl. In the
branches above, squirrels and jays carried on their endless arguments;
crickets droned in the leaf-tangle at their feet. Once Simon saw a large gray
owl scudding like a phantom through the twining branches overhead. Later
he saw another, so like the first as to have been its twin.
   Binabik watched the sky carefully when they passed through clearings,
and jogged them a little to the east; soon they reached a small forest stream
that gurgled past a thousand tiny breakwaters of fallen branches. They
walked through the thick grasses that lined its banks for a while; when the
bulk of a tree blocked their passage, they stepped out and made their way
past on the backs of the stones dotting the stream’s gentle course.
   The streambed became wider as another small waterway entered, and
within moments Binabik raised a hand to bring them to a stop. They had
just rounded a bend in the watercourse; here the stream suddenly dropped
away, rushing in a tiny waterfall down a series of rock slabs.
   They stood on the rim of a great bowl, a sloping expanse of trees leading
down to a wide, dark lake. The sun had dipped out of sight, and in the
insect-humming twilight the water looked purple and deep. Tree roots
twisted down into the water like snakes. There was an air of stillness about
the lake, of quiet secrets whispered only to the endless trees. At the far side,
dim and difficult to see in the gathering darkness, a tall thatched hut stood
over the water in such a way that at first it seemed to float on air; a moment
later Simon could see that it was raised above the lake’s surface on stilts.
Buttery light gleamed in the two small windows.
   “The house of Geloë,” Binabik said, and they started down into the tree-
lined bowl. With a soundless rush of wings a gray shape tore loose from the
trees above them and glided out to circle low over the lake two times, then
vanish into the darkness beside the cottage. For a moment Simon thought he
saw the owl pass into the cottage, but his eyelids were heavy from
exhaustion and he could not see clearly. The crickets’ nightsong rose about
them as the shadows deepened. A bounding shape came speeding around
the lake’s rim toward them.
   “Qantaqa!” Binabik laughed, and ran down to meet her.