
                     The Gossamer Towers




He tried to ignore the hand on his shoulder, but could not. Opening his
eyes, he found the room still quite dark, two angular siftings of stars the
only indication of where the windows stood.
   “Let me sleep,” he moaned. “It’s too early!”
   “Get up, boy!” came the harsh whisper. It was Geloë, her robe loosely
drawn about her. “There is no time to waste.”
   Blinking his dry and painful eyes, Simon looked past the kneeling
woman to see Binabik quietly repacking his bag. “What’s going on?” he
asked, but the troll seemed too busy to talk.
   “I have been outside,” Geloë said. “The lake has been discovered—I
assume by the men who were hunting you.”
   Simon sat up quickly and reached for his boots. It all seemed so unreal in
the near-darkness; nevertheless, he could feel his heart beating swiftly.
“Usires!” he cursed quietly. “What shall we do? Will they attack us?”
   “I do not know,” Geloë answered as she left him to go and wake
Malachias—no, Marya, Simon reminded himself. “There are two camps,
one at the lake’s far end by the inlet stream, one not far from here. Either
they know whose house this is and are trying to decide what to do, or they
do not yet know the cottage is here at all. They may have arrived after we
put the candles out.”
   A sudden question occurred to him. “How do you know they’re out at the
far end?” He peered through the window. The lake was again shrouded in
fog, and there was no sign of campfires. “It’s so dark,” he finished, and
turned back to Geloë. She was certainly not dressed to be out prowling in
the woods. Her feet were bare!
    But even as he looked at her, at the hastily donned robe and the wet
beads of mist clinging to her face and hair, he remembered the great wings
of the owl who had flown before them to this lake. He could still feel the
strong talons that had carried him away when the hateful thing on the Road
of Dreams had been crushing out his life.
    “I don’t suppose it’s important, is it?” he finished at last. “It’s only
important that we know they’re out there.” Despite the faint moonlight, he
saw the witch woman grin.
    “Right you are, Simon-boy,” she said softly, then went to help Binabik
fill two more bags, one each for Simon and Marya.
    “Listen,” Geloë said as Simon, now dressed, came over. “It is obvious
you must get out now, before dawn,” she squinted out at the stars for a
moment, “which will not be long in coming. The question is, how?”
    “All we can hope,” Binabik grunted, “is to slip away and try and pass
them in the forest, moving with great quietness. We with certainty cannot
fly.” He grinned, somewhat sourly. Marya, bundling into a cloak the valada
had given her, stared at the troll’s smile in puzzlement.
    “No,” said Geloë seriously, “but I also doubt you could slip by those
terrible hounds. You may not fly, but you can float away. I have a boat tied
beneath the house. It is not big, but it will hold you all—Qantaqa too, if she
does not frolic around.” She affectionately ruffled the ears of the wolf, who
reclined by her squatting master.
    “And of what good is that?” Binabik asked. “Shall we paddle out to the
center of the lake, then in the morning dare them to swim and get us?” He
finished the last bag and pushed one toward Simon, one toward the girl.
    “There is an inlet stream,” Geloë said. “It is small and not very fast-
flowing, not even as strong as the one you followed on your way here. With
four paddles you can easily make your way out of the lake and up it some
ways.” Her faint frown was more contemplative than worried.
“Unfortunately, it also passes by one of the two camps. Well, that is not to
be helped. You must simply paddle quietly. Perhaps it will even help in your
escape. Such a thickheaded man as your Baron Heahferth—believe me, I
have had my dealings with him and his like!—would not credit that his
quarry might slide by so near.”
    “Heahferth is not giving me worry,” Binabik replied. “It is that one who
is truly leading the hunt—the Black Rimmersman, Ingen Jegger.”
    “He probably doesn’t even sleep,” added Simon. He didn’t like the
memory of that one at all.
    Geloë made a wry face. “Never fear, then. Or at least, do not let fear
overwhelm you. Some useful distraction or other may occur . . . one never
knows.” She stood up. “Come, boy,” she said to Simon, “you are good-
sized. Help me untie the boat and move it silently to the front door bridge.”

                                    •••

   “Can you see it?” Geloë hissed, pointing at a dark shape bobbing on the
ebony lake near the far corner of the elevated house. Simon, already knee-
deep in the water, nodded his head. “Go quietly, then,” she said—somewhat
unnecessarily, Simon thought.
   As he waded around the side, head-high to the cottage’s stilted floor-
boards. Simon decided that he had not been mistaken last afternoon, when
he had felt that somehow things around the hut had changed. That tree
there, roots halfway into the water: he had seen it the first day they had
arrived, but then—he was sure, by Usires!—it had been on the cottage’s
other side, near the door plank. How could a tree move?
   He found the boat’s tie rope with his fingers and slid them up until he
encountered the place where it was tied to a sort of hoop hanging down
from the bottom of the cottage. As he bent down at a back-aching angle to
try and work the knot loose, he wrinkled his nose against the strange reek.
Was it the lake, or the underside of the house itself that smelled so? Beside
the odor of damp wood and mold, there was also a kind of odd, animal
scent—warm and musky, but not unpleasant.
   Even as he squinted into the darkness the shadows lightened a bit; he
could even see the knot! His pleasure at that, and the rapid untying that
followed, was dashed by the cold realization that dawn would be coming
soon: the fading darkness was his friend. After pulling the tie line loose, he
began wading back, towing the boat quietly behind him. He could just
discern the dim shape of Geloë standing huddled beside the long plank that
sloped from the hut’s entrance; he headed toward her as quickly as he
could . . . until he tripped.
   With a splash and a muffled cry, he half-fell down onto one knee, then
drew himself upright. What had caught at him? It felt like a log. He tried to
step over the obstruction, but merely succeeded in putting his bare foot
down directly on top of it, and had to stifle the urge to cry out again.
Although it lay unmoving and solid, still it had the scaly feel of one of the
pikefish from the Hayholt’s moat, or one of the stuffed cockindrills
Morgenes had kept perched on his shelves. As the ripples quieted, and he
heard Geloë’s quiet but wary voice asking if he had hurt himself, he looked
down.
   Although the water was very nearly opaque in the darkness, Simon was
sure he could see the outlines of some strange type of log, or rather a vast
branch of some kind, for he could see that the thing he had tripped over,
lying close beneath the surface of the water, joined two other scaly
branches. Together they seemed connected to the base of one of the two
pillars on which the cottage stood suspended over the lake.
   And as he stepped carefully over it, sliding silently though the water
toward the shadow that was Geloë, he suddenly realized that what the tree
roots—or branches, or whatever they were—what they truly looked like
was . . . some kind of monstrous foot. A claw, actually, the claw of a bird.
What a funny idea! A house did not have bird’s feet, any more than a house
got up and . . . walked.
   Simon was very quiet as Geloë tied the boat up to the base of the plank.

                                    •••

   Everything and everybody was packed into the tiny boat: Binabik
perched in the pointed brow, Marya in the middle, Simon seated in the stern
with a restless Qantaqa between his knees. The wolf was obviously very
uncomfortable; she had whined and resisted when Binabik ordered her into
the little craft. He had finally needed to smack her lightly on the snout. The
discomfort on the little man’s face showed clearly even in the predawn
darkness.
   The moon had swung far into the blue-black vault of the lightening
western sky. Geloë, after handing them the paddles, straightened up.
   “Once you have gotten safely out of the lake and a bit upstream, I think
you should probably carry the boat overland through the forest to the
Aelfwent. It is not a very heavy craft, and you don’t need to carry it far. The
river is flowing the proper direction, and should get you to Da’ai Chikiza.”
   Binabik reached out with his paddle and pushed the boat away from the
plank. Geloë stood ankle-deep at the lake’s edge as they spun gently out
from the shore.
   “Remember,” she whispered, “edge those paddles into the water as you
reach the inlet stream. Silence! That is your protection.”
   Simon raised his palm. “Farewell, Valada Geloë.”
   “Farewell, young pilgrim.” Her voice was already growing faint, with
less than three cubits between them. “Good luck to you all. Fear not! I will
take good care of the little girl.” They slid quietly away, until the witch
woman was only a shadow beside the house’s near stilt.
   The prow of the little boat cut through the water like a barber’s blade
through silk. At Binabik’s gesture they lowered their heads, and the troll
silently guided the craft toward the center of the misty lake. As Simon
huddled into the thick fur of Qantaqa’s back, feeling the pulse of her
nervous breath, he watched tiny rings form on the lake’s surface beside the
boat; at first he thought it might be fish, up early to break their fast on
mayflies and mosquitos. Then he felt a tiny drop of moisture splash on the
back of his neck, and another. It was raining again.
   As they neared the middle, cutting through swarms of hyacinths that lay
scattered on the water before them as though cast in the path of a returning
hero, the sky began to brighten. Dawn did not announce its arrival: it would
be hours before the sun cut through the clouds and became visible in the
sky. Rather, it was as if a layer of darkness had been stripped away from the
heavens, the first of many veils. The line of trees that had been a blot of
obscurity on the horizon became a thatch of distinguishable treetops
profiled against the slate-gray sky. The water was black glass around them,
but now some details of the shoreline could be seen, the faint, pale tree
roots like the twisted legs of beggars, the dim silver shine of a granite
outcropping—all standing around the secret lake like a court gallery waiting
for the players to arrive, all slowly metamorphosing from gray night shapes
to the vivid objects of day.
   Qantaqa hunched, surprised, as Marya suddenly leaned forward to peer
over the gunwale of the boat. She started to say something, checked herself,
and instead pointed a finger out across the bow and slightly to the right.
    Simon squinted, then saw it: an anomalous shape in the orderless but
somehow symmetrical forest fringe, a square, blocky shape that was a
different color from the dark branches around it—a striped blue tent.
    Now they could see several more, a crowd of three or four just behind
the first. Simon scowled, then smiled disdainfully. How typical of the Baron
Heahferth—from what he had heard in his days at the castle, anyway—to
carry such luxuries out into the wild forest.
    Just beyond the scatter of small tents the lakeshore dipped back for
several ells, then reappeared again, leaving a dark space in the middle as
though a bite had been taken from the shoreline. Tree branches hung low
over the water there; it was impossible to see if it was truly the river inlet,
but Simon felt sure that it was.
    Right where Geloë said! he thought. Sharp, sharp eyes she’s got—but
then, that’s not much of a surprise, is it?
    He pointed to the dark break in the lake’s rim, and Binabik nodded: he
had seen it, too.
    As they neared the silent camp, Binabik had to paddle a bit harder to
keep them scudding along at a good pace; Simon guessed that they must be
starting to feel the push of the feeder stream. He delicately lifted his paddle
to lower it over the side. Binabik, catching the movement from the corner of
his eye, turned and shook his head, silently mouthing “not yet”; Simon
stopped the small paddle just above the rain-puckered water.
    As they slid past the tents, not thirty ells from the shore, Simon saw a
dark shape moving among the walls of azure cloth. His throat tightened. It
was a sentry: he could see the dull sheen of metal beneath the cloak. He
might even be facing in their direction, but it was difficult to tell, for he had
the hood of his cloak up around his head.
    Within instants the others had also seen the man. Binabik slowly lifted
his paddle from the water and they all leaned forward, hoping to show as
little profile as possible. Even if the soldier chanced to look out onto the
lake, perhaps his eye would pass over them, or see only a log bobbing on
the water—but that was really too much to hope for, Simon felt sure. He
could not imagine the man failing to spot them if he turned, close as they
were.
    Even as the progress of the little craft slowed, the dark gap in the
shoreline came up before them. It was the inlet stream: Simon could see the
water rippling faintly where it passed over the rounded back of a stone
some few yards up the channel. It had also nearly stopped their forward
motion; as a matter of fact, the nose of the boat was beginning to come
around, rebuffed by the mild current. They would have to put paddles in the
water soon, or be pushed into the bank just below the blue tents.
   Then, finished with whatever had caught his attention at the far side of
the camp, the sentry turned around to gaze out across the lake.
   Within an instant, even before the mounting fear could truly take hold of
them, a dark shape dropped from the trees over the camp and skimmed
swiftly toward the sentry. It sailed through the branches like a huge gray
leaf and fetched up against his neck, but this leaf had talons; when he felt
them at his throat the armored man gave a shout of horror and dropped his
spear, beating at whatever had clutched him. The gray shape fluttered up,
wings churning, and hung over his head just beyond his reach. He shouted
again, clutching his neck, and fumbled in the dirt for his spear.
   “Now!” Binabik hissed. “Paddle!” He and Marya and Simon drove the
wooden blades into the water, pulling desperately. For the first few strokes
they seemed somehow snagged, water splashing purposelessly as the boat
rocked. Then they began to ease forward, and within moments were
pushing against the stronger current of the stream, sliding in beneath the
overarching branches.
   Simon looked back to see the sentry, head bare, leaping up and down
trying to swat the hovering creature. A few of the other men sat up from
their bedrolls, beginning to laugh as they watched their comrade, who had
dropped his spear and was now throwing rocks at this daft, dangerous bird.
The owl dodged the missiles with ease; as Simon lowered the curtain of
leafy branches down behind the boat it gave a flirt of its wide white tail and
circled up into the shadowed trees.
   As they strained forward against the difficult current—surprisingly
difficult, since on the surface it did not appear to be moving at all—Simon
gave a quiet chortle of triumph.

                                    •••

  For a long time they paddled hard against the river’s flow. Even had they
not felt the need for silence they would have been hard-pressed to make any
conversation, the paddling was such strenuous work. At last, close to an
hour later, they found a small backwater hedged in by a secretive screen of
reeds where they could stop and rest.
   The sun was now well up, a glowing blur behind a pearly, sky-wide
canopy of clouds. A film of mist still clung to the forest and river, so that
their surroundings seemed the landscape of a dream. Somewhere up ahead
the stream was passing through or over some obstacle; the quiet purr of
moving water was augmented by the chimelike tones of the watercourse
leaping and splashing back upon itself.
   Simon, panting, watched the girl Marya as she leaned on the gunwale,
her cheek resting on her forearm. It was hard to understand how he had ever
mistaken her for a boy. What he had seen as foxlike, as a sharpness of
feature unusual in a boy, he now saw as delicacy. She was flushed with
exertion; Simon stared at her ruddy cheek, and his eye moved down the
white length of her extended neck, to the gentle but well-defined protrusion
of her collarbone where the boy’s shirt she wore gaped open at the throat.
   She’s not well-padded . . . not like Hepzibah, he mused. Huh! I’d like to
see Hepzibah pass as a boy! Still, she’s pretty in a kind of thin way. Her
hair’s so very black.
   Marya’s eyes fluttered closed. She continued to breathe deeply. Simon
absently stroked Qantaqa’s wide head.
   “Well made, is she not?” Binabik asked cheerfully. Simon gaped at him,
startled.
   “What?”
   Binabik frowned. “I am sorry. Perhaps you are calling them ‘him’ in
Erkynland? ‘It,’ possibly? Still, you must agree that Geloë has done a job of
great craft.”
   “Binabik,” Simon said, his blush beginning to fade, “I don’t have any
idea what you are talking about.”
   The little man pounded the gunwale softly with the flat of his hand.
“What a nice work Geloë has accomplished with bark and wood. And so
light! We shall not have much trouble, I am thinking, to carry this overland
to the Aelfwent.”
   “The boat . . .” Simon said, nodding like a village idiot. “The boat. Yes, it
is well made.”
   Marya sat up. “Are we going to try and cross to the other river now?” she
asked. As she turned again to look out across the thin strip of forest visible
through the reeds, Simon noticed the dark circles under her eyes, her
strained look. In a way, he was still upset with her for being relieved when
Geloë volunteered to keep the child, but he was glad to see that this servant
girl seemed concerned, that she wasn’t just the kind of girl who laughed and
teased all the time.
   Well of course she’s not, he thought a moment later. As a matter of fact, I
don’t think I’ve seen her smile yet. Not that things haven’t been frightening
—but you don’t see me always frowning and moping.
   “That might perhaps be a good idea,” Binabik said, responding to
Marya’s question. “I believe that the noise which is sounding ahead is a
gathering of rocks in the stream. If that is being the case, we would anyway
have little choice but to carry the boat around. Perhaps Simon would go
find out.”
   “How many years old are you?” Simon asked Marya. Binabik, surprised,
turned around and stared. Marya quirked her lips and looked at Simon for a
long moment.
   “I am . . .” she began, then paused. “I will have sixteen years in
Octander.”
   “Fifteen, then,” said Simon, a little smugly.
   “And you?” the girl challenged.
   Simon bristled. “Fifteen!”
   Binabik coughed. “Well and good that shipmates should have
acquaintance of each other, but . . . perhaps later. Simon, could you go to
see if those are indeed rocks ahead?”
   He was about to agree, then suddenly did not want to. Was he an errand
boy? A child, to run and find out things for the grown-ups? Who had made
the decision to go and rescue this stupid girl from a tree, anyway?
   “As long as we need to cross to the whatever-it’s-called, why bother?” he
said. “Let’s just do it.”
   The troll stared, then at length nodded his head. “Very well. I think it will
do my friend Qantaqa good to be stretching her legs, besides.” He turned to
Marya. “Wolves are not sailors, you know.”
   Now for a few moments Marya stared at Binabik as if he were odder than
Simon. Then she burst into ringing laughter.
  “That’s very true!” she said, and laughed again.

                                     •••

    The canoe was indeed feathery light, but they still had difficulty carrying
it through the clinging branches and creepers. To keep it at a height where
both Binabik and the girl could help bear the load they had to hold the
upside-down boat in such a way that the sharp angle of the stern kept
thumping against Simon’s breastbone. He couldn’t see his feet as he
walked, either, with the result that time and again he was tripped up in the
undergrowth. Rain showered down through the overhanging net of boughs
and leaves; with his hands occupied, Simon could not even wipe away the
drops that ran into his eyes. He was not in the best of all possible moods.
    “How far is it, Binabik?” he asked at last. “My chest is being battered to
pieces by this by-Usires damnable boat.”
    “Not far, I am hoping,” the troll called, his voice echoing strangely from
beneath the stretched-bark shell. “Geloë said that the inlet stream and the
Aelfwent run side by side for a long distance, being only a quarter of a
league or so apart. Soon we should reach it.”
    “Soon it had better be,” Simon said grimly. In front of him Marya made a
noise that he was sure was a sound of disgust—disgust with him, probably.
He scowled horribly, red hair stringy and wet on his forehead.
    At last they heard another sound above the soft drumming of raindrops
on leaves, a breathy rush that made Simon think of a room full of
murmuring people. Qantaqa leaped ahead, clattering through the
underbrush.
    “Hah!” Binabik grunted, laying his end of the boat down. “You see? We
have found it! T’si Suhyasei!”
    “I thought it was named Aelfwent.” Marya rubbed the place where the
boat had rested on her shoulder. “Or is that what trolls always say when
they find a river?”
    Binabik smiled. “No. That is a Sithi name. It is a Sithi river, in a way,
since they used to be boating upon it when Da’ai Chikiza was their city.
You should be knowing that. Aelfwent means ‘Sithi river’ in the old tongue
of Erkynland.”
    “Then what does . . . what you said mean?” Marya asked.
    “T’si Suhyasei?” Binabik thought. “Hard it is to say, exactly. It means
something like: ‘her blood is cool.’”
    “Her?” Simon asked, digging mud from his boots with a stick. “What’s
‘her’ this time?”
    “The forest,” Binabik replied. “Come now. You can be washing that mud
off in the water.”
    They carried the boat down the bank, pushing it through a thicket of
cattails only with a great deal of stem snapping, until the river was before
them—a wide, healthy expanse of water, far bigger than the inlet stream,
and with what looked like a far stronger current. They had to lower the boat
down into the gully carved by the river’s passage; Simon, the tallest, wound
up standing knee-deep in the shallows to receive the boat—his boots were
indeed washed clean. He held the bobbing craft as Marya and the troll first
levered a doubtful Qantaqa over the edge—without much help from the
wolf herself—then followed after. Simon climbed in last, taking his place in
the stern.
    “Your positioning, Simon,” Binabik told him gravely, “requires great
responsibility. We shall find little need to paddle with a current of such
vigor, but you must steer, and you must call out when there are rocks ahead
so we can all help push away from them.”
    “I can do it,” he said quickly. Binabik nodded and let go of the long
branch he had been clutching; they eased off from the bank and out onto the
surging Aelfwent.
    It was a little difficult at first, Simon found. Some of the rocks that they
needed to avoid were not even visible above the water’s glassy surface;
rather, they lay just below, only recognizable by the shiny humps made by
the water above them. The first one that Simon did not see made a horrible
noise scraping along the taut hull, giving them all a moment’s scare, but the
little boat bounded away from the submerged stone like a sheep fleeing the
shears. Soon Simon had the feel of it; in spots the craft seemed almost to
skim the top of the water, weightless as a leaf on the river’s undulating
back.
    As they hit a stretch of smoother water, the clamor of the rocks falling
away behind them, Simon felt his heart swell within his chest. The playful
hands of the river tugged his trailing paddle. A memory of climbing on the
Hayholt’s broad battlements came to him—breathless with his own power,
with the sight of the ordered fields lying so far below. He remembered, too,
crouching in the bell chamber of Green Angel Tower, looking down on the
huddling houses of Erchester, staring out over the broad world with the
wind in his face. Now, in the stern of the little boat, he was again both of
the world and above it, far above it, sailing like the spring wind gusting
through the treetops. He lifted the paddle in the air before him . . . it was
now a sword.
   “Usires was a sailor,” he abruptly sang, the words coming back to him
in a rush. It was a tune someone had sung to him when he was very young.

               “Usires was a sailor
               He went upon the ocean
               He took the Word of God
               And he went sailing to Nabban-o!”

  Binabik and Marya turned to look at him; Simon grinned.

               “Tiyagaris was a soldier
               He went upon the ocean
               He took the Word of Justice
               And went sailing to Nabban-o!

               King John he was a ruler
               He went upon the ocean
               He took the word of Aedon
               And went sailing to Nabban-o! . . .”

   He trailed off.
   “Why do you stop?” Binabik asked. Marya still stared, a speculative look
in her eye.
   “That’s all I know,” Simon said, lowering his paddle back into the boat’s
rippling wake. “I don’t even know where it’s from. I think one of the
chambermaids used to sing it when I was small.”
   Binabik smiled. “A good song for river travel, I am thinking, although
some of the details have not much historical correctness. Are you sure you
can remember no more?”
   “That’s it.” His failure to recall troubled him little. Just a short hour on
the river had redeemed his mood entirely. He had been on a fisherman’s
boat in the bay, and had enjoyed it . . . but that was nothing to this, to the
forest rushing by, and the feeling of the delicate boat beneath him, as
sensitive and responsive as a colt.
   “I have no sailing songs to sing,” the troll said, pleased by Simon’s
change of mood. “In high Qanuc the rivers are ice, and used only for the
sliding games of trollings. I could be singing perhaps of mighty Chukku,
and his adventures . . .”
   “I know a river song,” said Marya, running a slender white hand through
her thatch of black hair. “The streets of Meremund are full of sailor’s
songs.”
   “Meremund?” Simon asked. “How did a castle girl ever get to
Meremund?”
   Marya curled her lip at him. “And where do you think the princess and
all her court lived before we came to the Hayholt—the wilds of Nascadu?”
She snorted. “Meremund, of course. It is the most beautiful city in the
world, where the ocean and the great river Gleniwent meet. You wouldn’t
know, you haven’t been there.” She grinned wickedly. “Castle boy.”
   “Then sing!” Binabik said, waving his hand before him. “The river waits
to hear. The forest, too!”
   “I hope I remember,” she said, sneaking a glance at Simon, who
haughtily returned it—her remark had barely touched the buoyancy of his
mood. “It’s a river rider song,” she continued, then cleared her throat and
began—tentatively at first, then more confidently—to sing in a sweet,
throaty voice.

               “. . . Now those who sail the Big Pond
               Will tell you of its mystery
               They’ll brag of all those battles
               And all that bloody history

               But talk to any river-dog
               Who sails upon the Gleniwent
               He’ll say God made the oceans
               But the River’s what he really meant
              Oh, the Ocean is a question
              But the River is an answer
              With her rollicking and frolicking
              As fine as any dancer
              So let Hell take the shirkers
              For this old boat won’t carry ’em
              And if we lose some crew or two
              We’ll drink to ’em at Meremund . . .

              Now some men go away to sea
              And they’re never seen again
              But every night we river-dogs
              Are found down at the inn

              And some may say we drink a bit
              And punch it up a mite
              But if the river is your lady
              That’s just how you rest at night

              Oh, the Ocean is a question
              But the River is an answer
              With her rollicking and frolicking
              As fine as any dancer
              So let Hell take the shirkers
              For this old boat won’t carry ’em
              And if we lose some crew or two
              We’ll drink to ’em at Meremund . . .

              In Meremund! In Meremund!
              We’ll drink to ’em in Meremund
              If we don’t spy ’em floating by
              It’ll save the penny to bury ’em . . . !”

  By the time Marya had gotten to the chorus the second time around,
Simon and Binabik knew the words well enough to join in. Qantaqa
flattened her ears as they hooted and shouted down the swift-racing
Aelfwent.
    “Oh the Ocean is a question, but the River is an answer . . .” Simon was
singing at the top of his lungs when the nose of the boat dipped down into a
trough and bounced up: they were among the rocks again. By the time they
had negotiated the roiling waters and were out into the clear, they were all
too breathless for singing. Simon, however, was still grinning, and as the
gray clouds above the forest roof opened, showering down more rain, he
tilted his chin up and caught the drops on his tongue.
    “Raining, now,” Binabik said, eyebrows arched beneath the hair
plastered to his forehead. “I am thinking we shall get wet.”
    The brief instant of silence was pierced by the troll’s high-pitched,
gusting laugh.

                                    •••

   When the light filtering down through the canopy of trees began to dim,
they steered the boat to the side and made camp. After building a fire, using
his sack of yellow dust to kindle the damp wood, Binabik produced a parcel
of fresh vegetables and fruits from one of the packs Geloë had provided.
Qantaqa, left to her own devices, went slinking off into the tall brush,
returning some time later with her fur soaking wet and a few streaks of
blood adorning her muzzle. Simon looked at Marya, who was meditatively
sucking on a peach pit, to see what her reaction would be to this evidence of
the brutal side of the wolf’s nature, but if the girl noticed she showed no
signs of unease.
   She must have worked in the princess’ kitchens, he guessed. Still, if I had
one of Morgenes’ stuffed lizards to slip in her cloak, then she’d jump, I’ll
wager.
   Thinking about her working in castle kitchens set him to wondering just
what it was she had done in the princess’ service—and now that he thought
of it, what had she been doing spying on him? But when he tried to ask her
questions about the princess, she only shook her head, saying that she could
not say anything about her mistress or her services until the message had
been delivered at Naglimund.
   “I am hoping you will forgive my asking,” Binabik said as he packed
away the few supper things and took his walking stick apart, producing at
last his flute, “but what is your plan if Josua is not at Naglimund, for
receiving your message?”
   Marya looked disturbed by this, but still would not say anything more.
Simon was tempted to ask Binabik about their plans, about Da’ai Chikiza
and the Stile, but the troll was already tootling absently on his flute. Night
pulled a blanket of darkness over all the great Aldheorte but their tiny fire.
Simon and Marya sat listening as the troll set his music to swooping and
echoing in the rainy treetops.

                                     •••

   They were on the river soon after sunup the next day. The rhythms of the
moving water now seemed as familiar as a child’s rhyme: the long idle
stretches in which it seemed that their boat was a rock upon which they sat
while the vast sea of trees marched by on either side, then the dangerous
excitement of the fast-running rapids that shook the frail craft as though it
were a hooked and wriggling fish. The rain let up in midmorning, and in its
place the sun sprinkled down through the overhanging branches, dotting the
river and forest floor with puddles of light.
   The welcome respite from the weather—unusually wintry for late Maia,
Simon couldn’t help noticing, remembering the icy mountain of their shared
dream—kept their spirits high. As they floated along through the tunnel of
leaning trees, broken here and there by majestic sheets of sunlight that
streamed down through gaps in the tangled branches to turn the river briefly
into a mirror of polished, golden glass, they entertained each other with
talk. Simon, reluctantly at first, told of the people he had known at the
castle—Rachel, Tobas the dogkeeper, who daubed his nose black with lamp
grease to more easily pass as family among his charges, Peter Gilded-Bowl,
giant Ruben and the rest. Binabik spoke more of his journeying, of his
youthful travels to the brackish Wran-country and the dismal, exotic
wastelands east of his Mintahoq home. Even Marya, despite her initial
reticence and the large area of unapproachable topics, made Simon and the
troll smile with her imitations of river-sailor and ocean-mariner arguments,
and her observations about some of the dubious nobility that surrounded the
Princess Miriamele at Meremund and the Hayholt.
    Only once did the conversation of the second day’s boating turn to the
darker subjects that shadowed all the companions’ thoughts.
    “Binabik,” Simon asked, as they took their midday meal in a sunlit patch
of forest-meadow, “do you really think we’ve left those men behind? Might
there be others looking for us, too?”
    The troll flicked an apple pip from his chin. “I do not know anything
with sureness, friend Simon—as I have already been saying. Sure I am that
we slipped by, that there was no immediate pursuit, but since I cannot be
knowing why exactly they seek us, I cannot know whether they can find us.
Do they know we are bound for Naglimund? That is not a difficult thing to
be supposing. But, three things there are in our favor.”
    “What things?” Marya asked, a slight frown on her face.
    “First, it is easier to hide than find in a forest.” He held up a stubby
finger. “Second, we are taking a back route to Naglimund that is not well-
known for hundreds of years.” Another finger. “Last, to find out our route,
those men will have to hear it from Geloë,” his third finger straightened,
“and that is a thing that will not, I think, happen.”
    Simon had been secretly worrying about just this. “Won’t they hurt her?
Those were men with swords and spears, Binabik. Owls won’t scare them
off forever if they think we’re with her.”
    A grave nod. The troll tented his short fingers. “I am not being
unconcerned, Simon. Daughter of the Mountains, I am not! But you know
little of Geloë. To think of her only as a village wise woman is to be making
a mistake, a mistake Heahferth’s men may regret if they do not treat her
with respect. A long time Valada Geloë has walked Osten Ard: she has been
many years in the forest, and many, many years before that among the
Rimmersgarders. Even preceding that, she was coming up from the south
into Nabban, and her travels before no one knows. She is one who can be
trusted for taking care of herself—far more than I, or even, as was proved
with such sadness, that good man Morgenes.” He reached for another apple,
the last in the bag. “But that is enough of such worrying. The river is
waiting, and our hearts must be light, so we can faster travel.”

                                    •••
   Later in the afternoon, as the shadows of the trees began to blend
together into one large blotch of shade stretched across the river, Simon
learned more of the mysteries of the Aelfwent.
   He was digging through his pack, searching for a bit of rag to wrap
around his hands, to protect them from the blisters raised by the coarse
paddle. He found something that felt like what he was searching for and
pulled it out. It was the White Arrow, still bound in the tattered hem of his
shirt. It was surprising to suddenly have it in his hand again, to feel its
delicacy laying in his palm like a feather that might be swept away in the
first errant breeze. He carefully unwrapped the shielding cloth.
   “Look here,” he said to Marya, reaching past Qantaqa to show it nestled
on its blanket of rag. “It’s a Sithi White Arrow. I saved the life of a Sitha-
man and he gave it to me.” He reconsidered briefly. “Shot it at me,
actually.”
   It was a beautiful thing; in the dimming light it was almost luminous, like
the shimmering breast of a swan. Marya looked at it for a moment, then
touched it with a raised finger.
   “It’s pretty,” she said, but in her tone there was none of the admiration
Simon had hoped to hear.
   “Of course it’s pretty! It’s sacred. It means a debt owed. Ask Binabik,
he’ll tell you.”
   “Simon is correct,” the troll called back from the prow. “That was
happening just before we met.”
   Marya continued to regard the arrow calmly, as though her mind flew
elsewhere. “It’s a lovely thing,” she said, only slightly more conviction in
her voice than the time before. “You’re very lucky, Simon.”
   He didn’t know why, but that made him furious. Didn’t she realize what
he had been through? Lich-yards, trapped Sithi, the hounds, the enmity of a
High King!? Who was she, to answer like one of the chambermaids
absentmindedly soothing him when he had skinned a knee?
   “Of course,” he said, holding the arrow up before him so it caught a
beam of near-horizontal sunlight, the riverbank a moving tapestry behind it,
“of course, for all the luck it’s brought me so far—attacked, bitten, hungry,
chased—I might as well have never got it.” He stared at it crossly, running
his eyes over the carvings that might have been the story of his life since he
had left the Hayholt, complicated but meaningless.
   “I really might as well throw it away,” he said casually. He never would,
of course, but it was strangely satisfying to pretend that he might. “I mean
to say, what good has it brought me . . . ?”
   Binabik’s warning cry came in midsentence, but by the time Simon could
sort things out it was too late. The boat struck the hidden rock almost
directly; the craft lurched, stern breaching the water with a sucking splash.
The arrow flew from Simon’s hand to go spinning through the air and into
the water churning around the rocks. As the boat’s rear smacked down,
Simon turned to look for it; a moment later they skidded off another
submerged stone and he was falling, the boat tipping, falling. . . .
   The water was shockingly cold. For an instant it was as though he had
fallen through some hole in the world into absolute night. Then he was
gasping, breaking the surface, whirling crazily in the turbulent water. He
struck a rock, spun away and went under again, terrifying water pushing the
air from his nose and mouth. Struggling, he got his head to the top again
and tensed as the swirling current battered him against one hard object after
another. He felt wind on his face for a moment and sucked in, coughing; he
felt some of the praise-Usires air making its way into his burning lungs.
Then, suddenly, the rocks were past and he was floating free, kicking to
keep his head above the plane of the river. To his surprise, the boat was
behind him now, just sliding around the last of the hump-backed stones.
Binabik and Marya were paddling hard, eyes round with fear, but Simon
saw the distance gradually growing wider. He was slipping downstream,
and as he pivoted his head wildly to either side he saw the riverbanks were
shockingly far away. He gasped in another great clout of air.
   “Simon!” Binabik yelled. “Swim back to us! We cannot row fast
enough!”
   Floundering, he tried to turn about and struggle back to them, but the
river pulled him with a thousand invisible fingers. He splashed, trying to
form his hands into the paddle shapes Rachel—Morgenes?—had once
shown him as they held him suspended in the shallows of the Kynslagh, but
the effort seemed laughable against the all-pervading power of the current.
He was tiring fast; he could not find his legs anymore, felt nothing but a
cold emptiness when he tried to make them kick. The water splashed up
into his eyes, prisming the reaching tree branches as he slipped back under
the surface.
    Something smacked down beside his hand, and he beat his arms against
the cold water to climb back up one last time. It was Marya’s paddle. With
her longer reach she had pushed up to Binabik’s place in the prow and
stretched out, extending the flat piece of wood to within inches of his grasp.
Qantaqa was standing beside her, barking, straining forward almost in
mimicry of the girl; the canoe, with so much weight forward, was leaning
dangerously.
    Simon sent a thought back to where his legs had been, told them to kick
if they could hear him, and threw out his hand. He barely felt the paddle as
he curled his numb fingers about it, but it was there, just where he needed it
to be.
    After they had hauled him over the side—a nearly impossible task in
itself, since he weighed more than any of them except the wolf—and after
he had coughed out or thrown up great quantities of river water, he lay
panting and shivering, curled in a ball at the bottom of the boat while the
girl and the troll searched for a spot to make landing.
    He recovered enough strength to crawl out of the boat by himself on
shaking legs. As he fell on his knees, spreading grateful palms on the soft
forest floor, Binabik reached down and plucked something loose from the
sodden, ragged mess that was Simon’s shirt.
    “See what was caught up in your clothes,” Binabik said, an odd look on
his face. It was the White Arrow. “Let us make a fire for you, poor Simon.
Perhaps you have had a lesson—a cruel lesson, but a serious one—about
speaking ill of Sithi gifts while sailing on a Sithi river.”
    Denied even the strength to be embarrassed as Binabik helped him shed
his clothes and wrapped him in his cloak, Simon fell asleep in front of the
blessed fire. His dreams were unsurprisingly dark, full of things that
clutched and smothered.

                                    •••

   Clouds hovered low the following morning. Simon felt very sick. After
chewing and swallowing a couple of strips of dried meat—against the
protestations of his queasy stomach—he clambered gingerly into the boat,
letting Marya take the stern this time while he huddled in the middle,
Qantaqa’s warm bulk pressed against him. He slept on and off throughout
the long day on the river. The sliding green blur that was the forest made
him dizzy, and his head felt hot and much too large, like a potato swelling
on the coals. Both Binabik and Marya checked the progress of his fever
solicitously. When he woke from the sludgy doze he had fallen into while
his two companions ate lunch, and found them bending over him, Marya’s
cool palm on his forehead, his confused thought was. What a strange
mother and father I have!
   They halted for the night just as twilight began creeping through the
trees. Simon, swaddled in his cloak like an infant, sat close to the fire,
unwrapping his arms only long enough to drink some soup the troll had
prepared, a broth of dried beef, turnips and onions.
   “We must be getting up with the first footsteps of the sun tomorrow,”
Binabik said, proffering the stem end of a turnip to the wolf, who sniffed it
with benign indifference. “Close we are to Da’ai Chikiza, but it would be
senseless to come upon it at night when it could not be properly seen. In
any way, we will have a long climbing up the Stile from there, and may as
well undertake it when the day is warm.”
   Simon watched blearily as the troll pulled Morgenes’ manuscript from
one of the packs and unwrapped it, squatting close to the flickering
campfire and tilting the pages to read; he looked like a little monk at prayer
over his Book of the Aedon. The wind rustled through the trees overhead,
knocking loose water drops that had clung to the leaves, remnants of the
afternoon’s shower. Mixed in with the dull rush of the waters below was the
insistent piping of the tiny river frogs.
   It took Simon a while to realize that the soft pressure against his shoulder
was not just another strange message from his sick, discomforted body. He
laboriously turned his chin past the collar of his heavy wool cloak, freeing a
hand to shoo Qantaqa off, only to see Marya’s dark head resting on his
upper arm, mouth slightly open, breath easing in and out with the rhythms
of sleep.
   Binabik looked over. “It was a hard day of working, today,” he smiled.
“Much paddling. If it is not paining you, let her stay there a bit.” He turned
back to the manuscript.
   Marya stirred against him and murmured something. Simon tugged the
cloak that Geloë had loaned her up higher; as it touched her cheek she half-
muttered something, reached up a hand and patted clumsily at Simon’s
chest, then squirmed a little nearer.
   The sound of her even breathing so close to his ear threaded its way in
among the noises of river and night forest. Simon shivered, and felt his eyes
becoming heavy, so heavy . . . but his heart was beating swiftly, and it was
the sound of his restless blood that led him down a path toward warm
darkness.

                                     •••

   In the gray, diffuse light of a rainy dawn, with eyes still sticky with sleep
and bodies queerly unresponsive from their too-early start, they saw the
first bridge.
   Simon was in the stern again. Despite the disorientation of boarding the
boat and joining the river in near-darkness, he felt better than he had the day
before: still light-headed, but much more fit. As they rounded a bend in the
river, which leaped along happily, careless of the hour, he saw a strange
shape arched across the water ahead. Wiping his eyes free for a moment of
the misty drizzle that seemed not so much to fall as to hang in the air, he
squinted.
   “Binabik,” he asked, leaning forward, “is that a . . .”
   “A bridge it is, yes,” the troll replied cheerily. “The Gate of Cranes, I
think it must be.”
   The river bore them ever closer, and they shipped water with their
paddles to slow down. The bridge stretched up from the choking
undergrowth of the river bank to extend in a slender arc into the trees on the
other side. Carved in pale, translucent green stone, it seemed delicate as a
span of frozen sea foam. Once covered with intricate carvings, now much
of its surface was obscured by moss and twining ivy; the spots that showed
through had been worn down, the whorls and curves and hard angles
softened, rounded by wind and rain. Perched at its apex, directly over their
heads as the little boat slid underneath, a cream-green, translucent stone
bird spread its water-worn wings.
   They passed through the faint shadow in moments, and were out the
other side. The forest suddenly seemed to breathe antiquity, as though they
had slid through an open door into the past.
   “Long ago have the river roads been swallowed up by Oldheart,” Binabik
said quietly as they all turned to watch the bridge dwindling behind them.
“Perhaps even the other works of the Sithi will be fading someday.”
   “How could people cross over a river on such a thing?” Marya
wondered. “It looked so . . . so fragile.”
   “More fragile than it was once, that is certain,” Binabik said with a
wistful backward glance. “But the Sithi never built . . . never build . . . for
beauty alone. Their works have strength. Does not the tallest tower in Osten
Ard, the work of their hands, still stand in your Hayholt?”
   Marya nodded, thinking. Simon trailed his fingers in the cold water.

                                     •••

   They passed eleven more bridges, or “gates” as Binabik called them,
since they had for a thousand years or more marked the river entrance to
Da’ai Chikiza. Each gate was named for an animal, the troll explained, and
corresponded to a phase of the moon. One by one, they drifted beneath
Foxes, Roosters, Hares and Doves, each one slightly different in shape,
made of pearly moonstone or bright lapis, but all unmistakably the work of
the same sublime and reverent hands.
   By the time the sun had climbed behind the clouds to its midmorning
station they were just slipping beneath the Gate of Nightingales. On the far
side of this span, on whose proud carvings flecks of gold still glimmered,
the river began to turn, bearing west one more time toward the unseen
eastern flank of the Wealdhelm Hills. There were no surface-roiling rocks
here; the current moved swiftly and evenly. Simon was in the midst of
asking Marya a question when Binabik raised his hand.
   As they rounded a bend it was before them: a forest of impossibly
graceful towers, set like a jeweled puzzle within the larger forest of trees.
The Sithi city, flanking the river on either side, seemed to grow out of the
very soil. It seemed the forest’s own dream realized in subtle stone, a
hundred shades of green and white and pale summer-sky blue. It was an
immense thicket of needle-thin stone, of gossamer walkways like bridges of
spiderweb, of filigreed tower tops and minarets reaching up into the high
treetops to catch sun on their faces like icy flowers. The world’s past lay
open before them, breathtaking and heartrending. It was the most beautiful
thing Simon had ever seen.
   But as they floated into the city, the river winding around the slender
columns, it became apparent that the forest was reclaiming Da’ai Chikiza.
The tiled towers, intricate with cracks, were netted in ivy and the twining
branches of trees. In many places, where once there had been walls and
doors of wood or some other perishable substance, the stone outlines now
stood precariously unsupported, like the bleached skeletons of incredible
sea creatures. Everywhere the vegetation was thrusting in, clinging to the
delicate walls, smothering the whisper-thin spires in uncaring leaves.
   In a way, Simon decided, it only made it more beautiful, as though the
forest, restless and unfulfilled, had grown a city from out of itself.
   Binabik’s quiet voice broke the silence, solemn as the moment; the
echoes quickly vanished in the choking greenery.
   “‘Tree of the Singing Wind,’ they named it: Da’ai Chikiza. Once, can
you imagine, it was full of music and life. All the windows burned with
lamps, and there were bright boats at sail upon the river.” The troll tilted his
head back to stare as they passed beneath a last stone bridge, narrow as a
feather quill, clothed in images of graceful antlered deer. “Tree of the
Singing Wind,” he repeated, distant as a man lost in memory.
   Simon wordlessly steered their little craft over to a bank of stone steps
that ended in a platform, nearly flush with the surface of the wide river.
They climbed out, tying the boat to a root that had pushed through the
cracked white stone. When they had mounted up they stopped, staring
silently at the vine-draped walls and mossy corridors. The very air of the
ruined city was charged with quiet resonance, like a tuned but unplucked
string. Even Qantaqa stood seemingly abashed, tail held low as she sniffed
the air. Then her ears straightened, and she whined.
   The hiss was almost imperceptible. A line of shadow leaped past Simon’s
face and struck one of the attenuated walkways with a sharp crack.
Sparkling chips of green stone exploded in all directions. Simon whirled to
look back.
   Standing not a hundred ells away, separated from the companions only
by the rolling expanse of river, stood a black-garbed figure holding a bow
as long as he was tall. A dozen or so others garbed in blue and black
surcoats were scrambling up a pathway to stand beside him. One of them
carried a torch.
   The black figure lifted a hand to his mouth, showing for an instant a flash
of pale beard.
   “You have nowhere to go!” Ingen Jegger’s voice came faint above the
sounds of the river. “Surrender in the King’s name!”
   “The boat!” Binabik cried, but even as they moved to the steps black-
clad Ingen reached out some slender thing toward the torchbearer; fire
blossomed at one end. A moment later he had nocked it on his bowstring.
As the companions reached the bottom step, a bolt of fire leaped across the
river, exploding into the side of the boat. The quivering arrow ignited the
bark almost instantly, and the troll had time only to pull one of the packs
from the craft before the flames forced him back. Momentarily hidden
behind the leaping fire, Simon and Marya darted up the stairs, Binabik close
behind. At the top Qantaqa was running from side to side, uttering hoarse
barks of dismay.
   “Run now!” Binabik snapped. On the far side of the river two more
bowmen stepped up to Ingen’s side. As Simon strained toward the cover of
the nearest tower he heard the awful hum of another arrow, and saw it skid
across the tiles twenty cubits before him. Two more clattered against the
tower wall that seemed so achingly far ahead. He heard a cry of pain, and
Marya’s terrified call.
   “Simon!”
   He whirled to see Binabik tumble to the ground, a tiny bundle at the
girl’s feet. Somewhere, a wolf was howling.