
                       Hunters and Hunted




The hollow roar of the river filled his ears. For a heartbeat it seemed
to Simon that the water was the only moving thing—that the archers on the
far side, Marya, he himself, all had been frozen into immobility by the
impact of the arrow that quivered in Binabik’s back. Then another shaft spat
past the white-faced girl, splintering noisily against a broken cornice of
shining stone, and all was frantic movement once more.
   Only half-aware of the insectlike scuttling of the archers across the
water, Simon covered the distance back to the girl and troll in three steps.
He bent to look, a strange, isolated part of his mind noticing how the boy’s
leggings Marya wore had tattered holes at the knee, and an arrow snicked
through his shirt beneath his arm. At first he thought it had missed him
completely; a moment later he felt a flare of pain sizzle along his rib cage.
   More darts skimmed past, hitting low on the tiles before them and
skipping like stones on a lake. Simon quickly kneeled and scooped the
silent troll into his arms, feeling the horrible, stiff arrow quiver between his
fingers. He turned, putting his back between the little man and the archers
—Binabik was so pale! He was dead, he must be!—then stood. The pain in
his ribs burned him again, and he staggered, Marya catching at his elbow.
   “Löken’s Blood!” screamed the black-garbed Ingen, his far-off voice a
faint murmur in Simon’s ear. “You’re killing them, you idiots! I said to keep
them there! Where is Baron Heahferth?!”
   Qantaqa had run down to join them; Marya tried to wave the wolf away
as she and Simon lumbered up the stairs into Da’ai Chikiza. One last
feathered shaft cracked into the step behind them, then the air was still
again.
   “Heahferth is here, Rimmersman!” a voice shouted amid the clamor of
armored men. Simon looked back from the top step. His heart sank.
   A dozen men in battle array were rushing past Ingen and his bowmen,
heading straight for the Gate of Stags, the bridge Simon and his companions
had passed beneath just before coming ashore. The baron himself rode
behind them on his red horse, a long spear held above his head. They
couldn’t have outrun even the foot soldiers for long—the baron’s horse
would catch them in three breaths.
   “Simon! Run!” Marya jerked his arm, pulling him forward at a stumble.
“We must hide in the city!” But Simon knew that was hopeless, too. By the
time they reached the first concealment the soldiers would be upon them.
   “Heahferth!” Ingen Jegger’s voice cried out behind them, a flat, small
sound above the river’s drone. “You can’t! Don’t be a fool, Erkynlander,
your horse . . . !”
   The rest was lost in water sounds; if Heahferth heard he did not seem to
care. In a moment the clangor of his soldiers’ feet upon the bridge was
matched by the pounding of hoofbeats on stone.
   Even as the din of pursuit mounted, Simon caught the toe of his boot on
an uprooted tile and pitched forward.
   A spear in the back . . . he thought to himself in midfall, and: How did all
this happen? Then he was tumbling painfully onto his shoulder, rolling to
protect the cradled body of the troll.
   He lay on his back staring up at the patches of sky gleaming through the
dark dome of trees, Binabik’s not unsubstantial weight perched on his chest.
Marya was pulling at his shirt, trying to get him upright. He wanted to tell
her it was not important now, no longer worth the bother, but as he sat up on
one elbow, propping the troll’s body with his other arm, he saw a strange
thing happening below.
   In the middle of the long, arching bridge, Baron Heahferth and his men
had stopped moving—no, that was not quite correct, they were swaying in
place—the men-at-arms clinging to the bridge’s low walls, the baron
perched atop his horse, his features not quite distinguishable from this
distance, but his pose that of a man who is startled out of sleep. A moment
later, for no reason Simon could discern, the horse reared and plunged
forward; the men followed, running faster than before. Immediately after—
a flicker behind the movement—Simon heard a great crack, as though a
giant hand had snapped off a tree trunk for a toothpick. The bridge seemed
to come unstuck in the middle.
   Before the shocked, fascinated eyes of Simon and Marya, the slender
Gate of Stags plunged downward, middle first, stones crumbling loose in
great angular shards to crash foaming into the water below. For a few
pulsebeats it seemed that Heahferth and his soldiers would reach the far
side; then, rippling like a shook-out blanket, the arc of stone folded in on
itself, sending a writhing mass of arms, legs, pale faces, and a thrashing
horse toppling down amidst the ragged blocks of milky chalcedony, to
disappear in gouts of green water and white froth. A few moments later the
head of the baron’s horse appeared several ells downstream, neck straining
upward, then it slid back into the swirling river.
   Simon slowly tilted his head around to the base of the bridge. The two
archers were on their knees, staring into the torrent; the black-hooded figure
of Ingen stood behind them, staring across at the companions. It felt like his
pale eyes were only inches away. . . .
   “Get up!” Marya shouted, pulling at Simon’s hair. He freed his gaze
from Ingen Jegger’s with an almost palpable snap of separation, like a cord
fraying through. He climbed to his feet, balancing his small burden, and
they turned and fled into the echoes and tall shadows of Da’ai Chikiza.

                                     •••

   Simon’s arms were aching after a hundred steps, and it felt as though a
knife was sliding in and out of his side; he fought to stay even with the girl
as they followed the bounding wolf through the ruins of the Sithi city. It
was like running through a cave of trees and icicles, a forest of vertical
shimmer and dark, mossy corruption. Shattered tile was everywhere, and
massive tangles of spiderwebs strung across beautiful, crumbling arches.
Simon felt as though he had been swallowed by some incredible ogre with
innards of quartz and jade and mother-of-pearl. The river sounds became
muted behind them; the rasp of their own hard breathing vied with the
scrape of their running feet.
    At last, it seemed they were reaching the outskirts of the city: the tall
trees, hemlock and cedar and towering pine, were closer together, and the
tiled flooring that had been everywhere underfoot now dwindled to
pathways coiling at the feet of the forest giants. Simon stopped running. His
eyesight was blackening at the edges. He stood in place and felt the earth
reel about him. Marya took his hand and led him a few limping steps to an
ivy-choked mound of stone that Simon, his sight slowly returning,
recognized as a well. He set Binabik’s body down gently on the pack that
Marya had been carrying, propping the little man’s side against the rough
cloth, then leaned on the well’s rim to suck air into his needy lungs. His side
continued to throb.
    Marya squatted next to Binabik, pushing away Qantaqa’s nose as the
wolf prodded at her silent master. Qantaqa took a step back, making a
whimpering sound of incomprehension, then lay down with her muzzle on
her paws. Simon felt hot tears spring to his eyes.
    “He’s not dead.”
    Simon stared at Marya, then at Binabik’s colorless face. “What?” he
asked. “What do you mean?”
    “He’s not dead,” she repeated without looking up. Simon kneeled beside
her. She was right: the troll’s chest was moving almost imperceptibly. A
frothy bubble of blood on his lower lip pulsed in time.
    “Usires Aedon.” Simon wiped his hand across his dripping forehead.
“We have to take the arrow out.”
    Marya looked at him sharply. “Are you mad? If we do, the life will run
out of him! He’ll have no chance at all!”
    “No.” Simon shook his head. “The doctor told me, I’m sure he did, but I
don’t know if I can get it out, anyway. Help me to take off his jacket.”
    When they had pried cautiously at the jacket for a moment, they realized
there was no possible way to remove it without pulling on the arrow. Simon
cursed. He needed something to cut the jacket away, something sharp. He
pulled the salvaged pack over by a strap and began to rummage through it.
Even in his sorrow and pain he was gratified to discover the White Arrow,
still wrapped in its shroud of rags. He pulled it out and began loosening the
knot that held the strips of cloth.
    “What are you doing?” Marya demanded. “Haven’t we had enough
arrows?”
   “I need something sharp to cut with,” he grunted. “It’s a pity we’ve lost
part of Binabik’s staff . . . it’s the part that’s got a knife in it.”
   “Is that what you’re doing?” Marya reached into her shirt and pulled out
a small knife in a leather sheath, hung on a throng around her neck. “Geloë
told me I should have it,” she explained, unsheathing it and passing it over.
“It’s not much good against archers.”
   “And bowmen aren’t much good at keeping bridges from falling, praise
God.” Simon began to saw away at the oiled hide.
   “Do you think that’s all that happened?” Marya said after a while.
   “What do you mean?” Simon panted. It was hard work, but he had cut
upward from the bottom of the jacket and past the arrow, revealing a sticky
mass of congealed blood. He pulled the knife blade up toward the collar.
   “That the bridge just . . . fell.” Marya looked up at the light filtering
down through the twining greenery. “Maybe the Sithi were angry about
what was happening in their city.”
   “Pfah.” Simon clenched his teeth and split the last piece of hide. “The
Sithi who are alive don’t live here anymore, and if the Sithi don’t die, like
the doctor told me, then there aren’t any spirits to make bridges fall.” He
spread the wings of the split jacket and winced. The troll’s back was
covered in drying blood. “You heard the Rimmersman shouting at
Heahferth: he didn’t want him to take his horse on the bridge. Now let me
think, damn you!”
   Marya raised her hand as though to strike him; Simon looked up, and
their eyes locked. For the first time he saw that the girl, too, had been
crying. “I gave you my knife!” she said.
   Simon shook his head, confused. “It’s just that . . . that devil Ingen may
have already found another place to cross. He’s got two archers, at least,
and who knows what’s become of the hounds . . . and . . . and this little man
is my friend.” He turned back to the bloodied troll.
   Marya was silent for a moment. “I know,” she said at last.
   The arrow had entered at an angle, striking a good hand’s length from the
center of the spine. By carefully tilting the small body, Simon was able to
slide his hand underneath. His fingers quickly found the sharp iron
arrowhead protruding from just below Binabik’s arm, near the front of his
ribs.
    “Blazes! It’s gone right through him!” Simon thought frantically. “A
moment . . . a moment . . .”
    “Break the point off,” Marya suggested, her voice now calm. “Then you
can pull it through more easily—if you’re sure you should.”
    “Of course!” Simon was elated, and a bit dizzy. “Of course.”
    It took him no little time to cut through the arrow beneath its head; the
little knife had been considerably dulled. When he finished, Marya helped
him tilt Binabik into the position where the arrow was most flexible. Then,
with a silent prayer to the Aedon under his tongue, he eased the arrow out
through the wound made by its entry as fresh blood welled around it. He
stared at the hateful object for a moment, then threw it away. Qantaqa raised
her massive head to watch its flight, gave a rumbling moan, and slumped
back down.
    They wrapped Binabik in the rags from the White Arrow, along with
strips cut from his ruined jacket, then Simon picked up the still faintly-
breathing troll and cradled him.
    “Geloë said climb the Stile. I don’t know where that is, but we’d best
continue on to the hills,” he said. Marya nodded.

                                    •••

   The glimpses of sun through the treetops told them it was near noontime
as they left the overgrown well. They passed quickly through the fringes of
the decaying city, and within an hour found the land beginning to slope
upward beneath their weary feet. The troll was again becoming a difficult
burden. Simon was too proud to say anything, but he was sweating
profusely, and his back and arms had begun to ache fully as much as his
wounded side. Marya suggested that he cut leg holes in the pack so that it
could be used to carry Binabik. After some consideration, Simon discarded
the idea. For one thing, it would mean too much jouncing for the helpless,
unconscious troll; also, they would have to leave some of the pack’s
contents behind, and most of that was food.
   When the gently rising land began to change into steep, brushy slopes of
sedge and thistle, Simon at last waved Marya to a stop. He set the little man
down and stood for a moment, hands on hips, sides puffing in and out as he
got back his breath.
    “We . . . we must . . . I must . . . rest . . .” he huffed. Marya looked up at
his flushed face with sympathy.
    “You can’t carry him all the way to the top of the hills, Simon,” she said
gently. “It looks to get steeper ahead. You’ll need your hands to climb
with.”
    “He’s . . . my friend,” Simon said stubbornly. “I can . . . do it.”
    “No, you can’t.” Marya shook her head. “If we can’t use the pack to
carry him, then we must . . .” Her shoulders slumped, and she slid down to
sit on a rock. “I don’t know what we must, but we must,” she finished.
    Simon sagged down beside her. Qantaqa had disappeared up the slope,
bounding nimbly along where it would take the boy and girl long minutes to
follow.
    Suddenly, an idea came to Simon. “Qantaqa!” he called, rising to his feet
and spilling the pack out on the grassy ground before him. “Qantaqa! Come
here!”
    Working feverishly, the unspoken thought of Ingen Jegger a hovering
shadow, Simon and Marya wrapped Binabik up neck to toe in the girl’s
cloak, then balanced the troll stomach down on Qantaqa’s back, tying him
in place with the last shredded strips of clothing from out of the pack.
Simon remembered the position from his involuntary ride to Duke
Isgrimnur’s camp, but he knew that if the thick cloak was between
Binabik’s ribs and the wolf’s back, the little man would at least be able to
breathe. Simon knew it was not a good situation for a wounded, probably
dying, troll, but what else could be done? Marya was right; he would need
his hands going up the hill.
    Once Qantaqa’s initial skittishness wore off, she stood passively as the
boy and girl worked, turning occasionally to try and sniff Binabik’s face
where it bobbed at her side. When they finished and started up the slope,
the wolf picked her way carefully, as if aware of the importance to her silent
burden of a smooth ride.
    Now they made better time, scrambling over stones and ancient logs
molting their bark in peeling strips. The bright, cloud-blurred ball of sun
that peered down through the branches had rolled far toward its western
mooring. Scrabbling along, the wolf’s gray and white tail floating before his
sweat-smarting eyes like a plume of smoke, Simon wondered where the
darkness would find them—and what might find them in that darkness.
                                     •••

   The going had become very steep, and both Simon and Marya were
beribboned with scratchmarks from the clutching undergrowth, when they
at last stumbled across a clear, horizontal crease in the side of the hill. They
sat down gratefully in the dusty track. Qantaqa looked as though she would
not mind exploring farther up the narrow, grass-clotted trail, but instead she
slumped down beside them, tongue lolling. Simon untied the troll from the
makeshift harness. The little man’s condition seemed unchanged, his
breathing still terribly shallow. Simon dribbled water into his mouth from
the waterskin, then passed it to Marya. When she had finished, Simon
cupped his hands, which she filled, and held them out for Qantaqa to drink.
Afterward he took several long swallows from the bag himself.
   “Do you think this is the Stile?” Marya asked as she ran her hands
through her damp black hair. Simon smiled weakly. Wasn’t that like a girl,
to be arranging her hair in the midst of the forest! She was very flushed, and
he saw that it brought out the freckles across the bridge of her nose.
   “It looks more like a deer path or some such,” he said at last, turning his
attention to where the track wandered away along the flank of the hill. “I
think the Stile is a Sithi thing, Geloë said. But I think we might follow this
for a while.”
   She’s not really thin, so much, he thought. It’s more what they call
delicate. He remembered how she reached up and snapped off the
overhanging branches, and her coarse river chanteys. No, maybe “delicate”
wasn’t quite it, either.
   “Let’s be off, then,” Marya broke into his ruminations. “I’m hungry, but
I’d rather not be out in the open here when the sun goes down.” She stood
up and began collecting the cloth strips to remount Binabik on his steed,
who was using her last moments of unencumbered freedom to scratch
behind one ear.
   “I like you, Marya,” Simon blurted out, and then wanted to turn away, to
run, to do something; instead he bravely stayed where he was, and a
moment later the girl looked up at him, smiling—and she was the one who
looked embarrassed!
   “I’m glad,” was all she said, and then moved away up the deer track a
few steps to let Simon, hands suddenly clumsy, bind Binabik into place.
Suddenly, as he finished tying the last loop beneath the shaggy belly of the
hugely patient wolf, he looked at the troll’s bloodless face, as slack and still
as death—and was angry with himself.
   What a mooncalf! he thought savagely. One of your closest friends is
dying, you’re lost in the middle of nowhere, being chased by armed men
and maybe worse—and here you stand moping over a skinny servant girl!
Idiot!
   He did not say anything to Marya as he caught up with her, but the
expression on his face must have told her something. She gave him a
pensive look and they fell into stride with no further conversation.

                                      •••

   The sun had dipped down behind the ridged backs of the hills when the
deer path began to widen. Within a quarter of a league it became a broad,
flat path that might have once been used for wagon travel, although it had
long since given over sovereignty to the creeping wilderness. Other, smaller
tracks wound alongside, distinguishable mainly as flaws in the smooth
cover of brush and trees. They came to a place where these lesser pathways
joined with theirs, and within a hundred ells found themselves walking
again on ancient stone tiles. Soon after, they reached the Stile.
   The wide, cobbled roadway cut across the track they had been following,
switching back and forth up the hill in a steep traverse. Tall grasses pushed
up between the cracked gray and white tiling, and in places large trees had
grown right through the road surface, shouldering the stones up and
outward as the trees gained size, so that each was now surrounded by a
small slagheap of uprooted stones.
   “And this will take us to Naglimund,” Simon said, half to himself. They
were the first words either had spoken for a long time.
   Marya was about to reply when something on the hilltop caught her eye.
She stared, but whatever had made the flash of light was gone.
   “Simon, I think I saw something bright up there.” She pointed to the
crest of the hill, a good league above them.
   “What was it?” he asked, but she only shrugged. “Armor, perhaps, if the
sun would reflect this late in the day,” he answered himself, “or the walls of
Naglimund, or, or who knows . . . ?” He looked up, narrowing his eyes.
   “We can’t leave the road,” he said finally. “Not until we get farther, not
while there’s light. I would never forgive myself if we didn’t get Binabik to
Naglimund, especially if he . . . if . . .”
   “I know, Simon, but I don’t think we can make it all the way over the top
tonight.” Marya kicked a stone, sending it rolling into the tall grass beside
the paving tiles. She winced. “I have more blisters on one foot than I’ve had
in my whole life before this. And it can’t be good for Binabik to bounce on
the wolf’s back all night,” she met his eyes, “if he’s even going to live.
You’ve done everything anybody could do, Simon. It’s not your fault.”
   “I know!” Simon replied angrily. “Let’s walk. We can talk about it while
we’re moving.”
   They trudged on. It did not take long for the wisdom of Marya’s words to
become uncomfortably obvious. Simon, too, was so scratched and blistered
and scuffed that he wanted to lie down and weep—a different Simon, the
Simon that had lived his castle-boy life in the labyrinthine Hayholt, would
have lain down—he would have sat on a stone and demanded dinner and
sleep. He was somewhat different, now: he still hurt, but there were other
things that were more important. Still, there was no good to be done by
crippling them all.
   At last even Qantaqa began to favor one of her legs. Simon was finally
ready to give in when Marya spotted another light on the spine of the hill.
This one was no sun reflection: blue twilight was settling over the slopes.
   “Torches!” Simon groaned. “Usires! Why now, when we’re almost
there?!”
   “That’s probably why. That Ingen monster must have headed for the top
of the Stile to wait for us. We must get away from the road!”
   Hearts stone-heavy, they quickly made their way off the Stile’s paving
and down into a gulley that ran along the width of the hill. They scurried
on, stumbling frequently in the fading light, until they found a little clearing
no wider than Simon was tall, protected by a stockade of young hemlocks.
As he looked up one last time before ducking into the cover of the high
brush, Simon thought he saw the gleaming eyes of several more torches
winking on the hilltop.
    “May those bastards burn in Hell!” he snarled breathlessly, crouching to
untie Binabik’s limp form from Qantaqa’s back. “Aedon! Usires Aedon!
How I wish I had a sword, or a bow!”
    “Should you take Binabik off?” Marya whispered. “What if we have to
run again?”
    “Then I’ll carry him. Besides, if it comes to running, we might as well
give up now. I don’t think I could run fifty steps, could you?”
    Marya ruefully shook her head.
    They took turns swigging at the waterskin while Simon massaged
Binabik’s wrists and ankles, trying to get some blood back into the troll’s
chill extremities. The little man was breathing better now, but Simon did
not feel confident that would last long: a thin film of bloody saliva bulged
in and out of his mouth with each breath, and when Simon skinned back the
little man’s eyelids, as he had once seen Doctor Morgenes do with a fainting
chambermaid, the whites of the troll’s eyes seemed quite gray.
    As Marya fished about in the pack for something to eat, Simon tried to
lift one of Qantaqa’s paws to see why she was limping. The wolf stopped
panting long enough to bare her teeth and snarl at him in a very convincing
manner. When he tried to pursue the investigation, she snapped at his hand,
jaws clashing hard not an inch from his probing fingers. Simon had almost
forgotten she was a wolf, and had grown used to handling her as though she
were one of Tobas’ hounds. He was suddenly grateful she had chastened
him so mildly. He left her alone to tongue-wash her ragged pads.
    The light dwindled, pinpoint stars blooming in the thickening darkness
overhead. Simon was chewing a piece of hard biscuit Marya had found for
him, and wishing he had an apple, or anything with juice to it, when a thin,
clamoring noise began to untangle itself from the song of the evening’s first
crickets. Simon and Marya looked at each other, then, for the confirmation
that they did not really need, to Qantaqa. The wolf’s ears were swung
forward, her eyes alert.
    There was no need to name the creatures that made that faraway baying
noise. Both of them were far too familiar with the sounds of hunting hounds
at full cry.
    “What should . . . ?” Marya started to ask, but Simon shook his head. He
banged his fist in frustration against the trunk of a tree, and absently
watched blood rise on the back of his pale knuckles. In a few minutes they
would be in full darkness.
   “There’s nothing we can do,” he hissed. “If we run, we will only make
more of a track for them to follow.” He wanted to lash out again, to break
something. Stupid, stupid, stupid, this whole bloody adventure—and to
what end?
   As he sat fuming, Marya pushed in close against his side, lifting his arm
and draping it around her shoulder.
   “I’m cold,” was all she said. He wearily leaned his head against hers,
tears of frustration and fear welling in his eyes as he listened to the noises
from the hillside above. Now he thought he could hear men’s voices
shouting back and forth above the din of the hounds. What he would give
for a sword! Unskilled as he was, he could at least cause them some pain
before they took him.
   Gently, he lifted Marya’s head from his shoulder and bent forward. As he
had remembered, Binabik’s skin bag was nestled at the bottom of the pack.
He pulled it out and ran his fingers through it, searching by touch alone in
the obscurity of the clearing.
   “What are you doing?” Marya whispered.
   Simon found what he was seeking and closed his hand on it. Some of the
noises were now coming from the hillside north of them, too, almost at their
level of the slope. The trap was closing.
   “Hold Qantaqa.” He got up and crawled a short distance, scouring the
brush until he found a good-sized broken branch, a thick one longer than his
arm. He brought it back and upended Binabik’s bag of powder on it, then
laid it down carefully. “I’m making a torch,” he said, pulling out the troll’s
flints.
   “Won’t that just lead them to us?” the girl asked, a note of detached
curiosity in her voice.
   “I won’t light it until I have to,” he replied, “but at least we’ll have
something . . . something to fight with.”
   Her face was in shadow, but he could sense her eyes on him. She knew
exactly how much good such a gesture would do them. He hoped—and the
hope was very strong—that she would understand why it was a necessary
gesture.
   The ferocious uproar of the dogs was horribly close now. Simon could
hear the sounds of the bushes being beaten down, and the loud cries of the
hunters. The sound of branches snapping grew louder, just above them on
the hillside and approaching rapidly—too loud a noise for dogs, Simon
thought, heart fluttering as he smacked flint against stone. It must be men
on horseback. The powder sparked but did not catch. The underbrush was
crackling as though a wagon was tumbling through it end over end.
   Catch, damn you, catch!
   Something smashed through the thicket just above their hiding place.
Marya’s hand clutched his arm hard enough to cause pain.
   “Simon!” she cried, and then the powder sputtered and flared; a wavering
orange flower blossomed at the tip of the branch. Simon leaped up,
swinging it out at the end of his arm, the flames rippling. Something
crashed out of the trees. Qantaqa pulled free of Marya’s grasp, howling.
   Nightmare! That was all Simon could think as he lifted the torch; the
light reached out, illuminating the thing that stood, startled upright before
him.
   It was a giant.
   In the horrifying, static instant that followed, Simon’s mind struggled to
absorb what his eyes saw—the thing that towered above him, swaying in
the torch glare. At first he thought it some kind of bear, for it was covered
all over in pale, shaggy fur. But no, its legs were too long, its arms and
black-skinned hands too human. The top of its hairy head was three cubits
above Simon’s as it leaned forward at the waist, eyes squinting in its
leathery, manlike face.
   The baying was everywhere, like the music of a ghastly choir of demons.
The beast lashed out a long, taloned arm, tearing the flesh of Simon’s
shoulder, rocking him backward so that he stumbled and almost dropped the
torch. The darting light of its flames briefly illuminated Marya, eyes wide
with horror as she clutched Binabik’s limp form, trying to drag him back
out of the way. The giant opened its mouth and thundered—that was the
only possible word for the echoing rumble that came out—and lunged at
Simon again. He leaped away, catching his foot on something and toppling
over, but before the thing could move toward him, its chest-rattling growl
turned into a howl of pain. It fell forward, half-slumping to the ground.
   Qantaqa had caught it behind a shaggy knee, a gray shadow dashing back
to leap again at the giant’s legs. The beast snarled and swiped at the wolf,
missing her once. The second time its broad hand caught her; she tumbled
over and over into the brush.
   The giant turned back to Simon, but even as he hopelessly raised the
torch before him, and saw its pulsing light reflected in the giant’s glossy
black eyes, a boiling mass of shapes came through the undergrowth,
howling like the wind in a thousand high turrets. They seethed around the
giant like an angry ocean—dogs everywhere, leaping and biting at the huge
creature as it raged in its thunderstorm voice. It windmilled its arms and
broken bodies flew away; one knocked Simon to the ground, his torch
skittering, but five more leaped in to fill the place of each one dislodged.
   Even as Simon crawled to the torch, his mind a jumble of insane,
feverish pictures, light suddenly bloomed everywhere. The vast shape of the
beast reeled around the clearing, roaring, and then men came, and there
were horses rearing and people shouting. A dark shape leaped over Simon,
knocking his torch away once more. The horse slid to a halt just beyond, the
rider standing atop his mount with a long spear flicking in and out of the
torchlight. A moment later the spear was a great black nail standing out
from the breast of the besieged giant, who gave a last shuddering roar and
slipped down beneath the convulsing blanket of hounds.
   The horseman dismounted. Men with torches ran past him to pull the
dogs off; the light revealed the horseman’s profile, and Simon climbed to
one knee.
   “Josua!” he said, then pitched forward. His last sight was the prince’s
spare face limned in the yellow light of torch flames, eyes widening in
surprise.

                                   •••

  Time came and went in fitful moments of waking and darkness. He was
on a horse before a silent man who smelled of leather and sweat. The man’s
arm was a stiff band around Simon’s middle as they swayed up the Stile.
  The horse’s hooves clopped on stone, and he found he was watching the
swinging tail of the horse before him. There were torches everywhere.
   He was looking for Marya, for Binabik, for everyone else . . . where were
they all?
   Some kind of tunnel was all around now, stone walls echoing with the
rippling sound of heartbeats. No, hoofbeats. The tunnel seemed to go on
forever.
   A great wooden door set in the stone loomed before them. It swung open
slowly, torchlight flooding out like water through a burst dam, and the
shapes of many men were in the spreading light of the entrance.
   And now they came down a long slope in the open air, the horses single
file, a glimmering snake of torches winding down the path ahead as far as
he could see. All around them was a field of bare earth, planted with
nothing but naked bars of iron.
   Below them, the walls were lined with more torches, the sentries staring
up at the procession descending from the hills. The stone walls were before
them, now level, now slowly rising up past their heads as they followed the
trail downward. The night sky was dark as the inside of a barrel, but salted
with stars. Head bobbing, Simon found himself sliding back down into
sleep—or the dark sky, it was hard to tell which.
   Naglimund, he thought, as the light of the torches splashed on his face,
and the men shouted and sang on the walls above. Then he was falling away
from the light, and darkness covered him like a drift of ebony dust.
PART THREE
Simon Snowlock