
                  The Councils of the Prince




Although he had been quite hungry while walking the castle walls
with Sangfugol, when Father Strangyeard came by to take him to the
kitchens—belatedly fulfilling his earlier promise—Simon found that his
appetite had fled. The stench of the afternoon’s burning was still in his
nostrils; he could almost feel the clinging smoke as he walked behind the
castle archivist.
   As they walked back across the misty commons, after Simon had picked
ineffectually at a plate of bread and sausages thumped down before him by
a stern kitchen woman, Strangyeard did his best to make conversation.
   “Perhaps you’re just . . . just tired, lad. Yes, that’s what it will be.
Appetite should be back in no time. Young people always have an appetite.”
   “I’m sure you’re right, Father,” Simon said. He was tired, and it was
easier sometimes to agree with people than to explain. Besides, he was not
entirely sure himself what was making him feel so limp, so washed-out.
   They walked on a while through the twilit inner ward. “Oh,” the priest
said at last, “I was meaning to ask you . . . I hope you don’t think it’s
grasping of me . . .”
   “Yes?”
   “Well, Binbines . . . Binabik, that is, he told me . . . told me of a certain
manuscript. A manuscript penned by Doctor Morgenes of Erchester? Such a
great man, such a tragic loss to the community of learning . . .” Strangyeard
shook his head sorrowfully, then seemed to forget what he had been asking,
for he walked several more steps in gloomy contemplation. Simon at last
felt compelled to break the silence.
    “Doctor Morgenes’ book?” he prompted.
    “Oh! Oh, yes . . . well, what I wished to ask was—and I’m sure it is too
great a favor—Binbines said it was saved, the manuscript, that it came with
you in your pack.”
    Simon hid a smile. The man took forever! “I don’t know where the pack
is.”
    “Oh, it’s under my bed—your bed, that is, for now. As long as you want,
actually. I saw the prince’s man put it there. I haven’t touched it, I assure
you!” he hastened to add.
    “Do you want to read it?” Simon was touched by the old man’s
earnestness. “By all means. I am too tired to look at it. Besides, I am sure
the doctor would prefer it to be examined by a man of learning—which is
certainly not me.”
    “Truly?” Strangyeard seemed dazzled, fidgeting nervously with his eye
patch. He looked as though he might pull it off and throw it into the air with
a whoop of glee. “Oh,” the priest breathed, composing himself, “that would
be splendid.”
    Simon felt uncomfortable: the archivist had, after all, moved out of his
own room so that Simon, a stranger, could use it. It was embarrassing that
he should be so grateful.
    Ah, he decided, but it’s not me he’s grateful to, I don’t think, so much as it
is the chance to read Morgenes’ work on King John. This is a man who
loves books the way Rachel loves soap and water.
    They had almost reached the low block of rooms along the southern wall
when a shape appeared—a man, unrecognizable in the fog and fast-
diminishing light. He made a faint clinking noise as he stepped in front of
them.
    “I’m searching for the priest Strangyeard,” the man said, his voice more
than a little slurred. He seemed to waver, and the clinking noise came again.
    “He is I,” Strangyeard said, a little more highly-pitched than usual,
“umm . . . that is, I am he. What is your business?”
    “I seek a certain young man,” the other said, and took a few steps closer.
“Is this him?”
   Simon tensed his muscles, but could not help noticing that the
approaching figure was not very big. Also, there was something about his
walk . . .
   “Yes.” Simon and Strangyeard spoke together, then the priest fell silent,
plucking distractedly at his headstrap as Simon continued. “I’m the one.
What do you want?”
   “The prince wants to speak with you,” the small figure said, closing to
within a few feet, peering up at Simon. He jingled faintly.
   “Towser!” Simon said happily. “Towser! What are you doing here!?” He
reached out and clamped his hands on the old man’s shoulders.
   “Who are you, then?” the jester said, startled. “Do I know you?”
   “I don’t know—I’m Simon! Doctor Morgenes’ apprentice! From the
Hayholt!”
   “Hmmm,” the jester said doubtfully. Up close he smelled of wine. “I
suppose so . . . it’s dim to me, lad, dim. Towser is getting old, like old King
Tethtain: ‘head snow-capped and weathered like distant Minari-mount,’”
he squinted, “and I’m not so sharp with faces as once I was. Are you the
one I’m to take to Prince Josua?”
   “I suppose.” Simon’s mood had lifted. “Sangfugol must have spoken to
him.” He turned to Father Strangyeard. “I must go with him. I haven’t
moved that pack—didn’t even know it was there.”
   The archivist mumbled an acknowledgment and scuttled off in quest of
his prize. Simon took the elbow of the old jester as they turned back across
the commons yard.
   “Whoosh!” said Towser, shivering; the bells on his jacket tinkled again.
“Sun was high today, but the wind is bitter tonight. Bad weather for old
bones—can’t think why Josua sent me.” He staggered a bit, leaning for a
moment on Simon’s arm. “That’s not true, really,” he continued. “He likes
to give me things to do. He’s not much for my jesting and tricks, you see,
but I don’t think he likes to see me idle.”
   They walked on for a while without speaking.
   “How did you get to Naglimund?” Simon asked at last.
   “Last wagon caravan up the Wealdhelm Road. Elias has closed it now,
the dog. Rough traveling it was, too—had to fight off bandits north of Flett.
Everything’s falling apart, boy. Everything’s going sour.”
   The guards at the front of the residence hall scrutinized them carefully in
the flickering torchlight, then knocked for the door to be unbolted. Simon
and the jester padded down the cold, flagstoned corridor until they reached
another heavy-beamed door and another pair of guards.
   “Here you are, boy,” Towser said. “I’m off to bed, had a late night last
night. It’s good to see a familiar face. Come by soon and have a noggin with
me, tell me what you’re been up to—yes?” He turned and shuffled off down
the hallway, the patchwork of his motley glimmering faintly until he was
swallowed by shadows.
   Simon stepped up between the impassive guards and rapped on the door.
   “Who goes there?” a boy’s voice asked.
   “Simon of Hayholt, to see the prince.”
   The door swung silently in to reveal a solemn-faced child of about ten
years dressed in the costume of a page. When he stepped out of the way,
Simon moved past him into a curtained antechamber.
   “Come through,” a muffled voice called. After some searching he found
the entrance, hidden by a curtain.
   It was an austere room, scarcely better furnished than Father
Strangyeard’s. Prince Josua, in gown and nightcap, sat at a table holding a
scroll open with his elbow. He did not look up as Simon entered, but waved
toward another chair.
   “Please, sit down,” he said, arresting Simon halfway into a deep bow. “I
will be a moment, only.”
   As Simon sat in the hard, unpadded chair, he saw a movement at the
back of the room. A hand pulled the curtain there aside, revealing a sliver of
lamplight beyond. A face appeared, dark-eyed, framed in thick black hair—
the woman he had seen in the courtyard, watching the burning. She was
looking intently at the prince, but when she looked up her stare met Simon’s
and held it, angry eyes like a cornered cat. The curtain dropped back into
place.
   Worried, for a moment he considered saying something to Josua. A spy?
An assassin? Then he realized why this woman was in the prince’s
bedchamber, and he felt very foolish.
   Josua looked up to the blushing Simon, allowing the scroll to curl on the
table before him. “Now, forgive me.” He rose, and pulled his chair nearer.
“I have been thoughtless. I hope you will understand that I meant no slight
to one who helped me escape my imprisonment.”
   “No . . . no need to apologize, your Highness,” Simon stammered.
   Josua spread the fingers of his left hand, a pained expression on his face.
Simon remembered what Sangfugol had said, and wondered what it must be
like to lose a hand.
   “Please. ‘Josua’ in this room—Prince Josua if you must. When I studied
with the Usirean brothers in Nabban they called me ‘acolyte,’ or ‘boy.’ I do
not think I have come so far since then.”
   “Yes, sir.”
   Josua’s eyes flicked away, back to his writing table; in the moment of
silence Simon looked him over carefully. In truth, he did not look a great
deal more princely than when Simon had seen him in his shackles in
Morgenes’ chambers. He looked tired, worn by care as surely as a rock is
worn by weather. In his nightclothes, high pale brow furrowed in thought,
he looked more like a companion archivist to Father Strangyeard than a
prince of Erkynland or a son of Prester John.
   Josua got up and walked back to his scroll.
   “The writings of old Dendinis,” he tapped it against his leather-capped
right wrist, “Aeswides’ military architect. Do you know, Naglimund has
never been broken by siege? When Fingil of Rimmersgard rolled down
from the north, he had to detach two thousand men to keep this castle
bottled up, to protect his flank.” He tapped again. “Dendinis built well.”
   There was a pause. At length Simon awkwardly filled it. “It is a mighty
keep, Prince Josua.”
   The prince tossed the scroll back onto the table, pursing his lips like a
miser counting out his taxes. “Yes . . . but even a mighty keep can be
starved out. Our supply lines are almost impossibly long, and where can we
expect to find help?” Josua looked at Simon as if he expected some answer,
but the youth could only goggle, without a thought of what to say. “Perhaps
Isgrimnur will bring back cheering news . . .” the prince continued, “and
perhaps not. Word is spreading up from the south that my brother is
assembling a great force of troops.” Josua stared at the floor, then looked up
suddenly, eyes bright and intent. “Again, forgive me. I find I am awash in
dark thoughts lately, and my words run ahead of my good sense. It is one
thing to read of great battles, you know, it is another to try and plan them.
Do you know how many things there are to think of? Mustering the local
troops, bringing the people and their stock into the castle, foraging, shoring
up the walls . . . and all these things useless if no one will fight at Elias’
back. If we stand alone, we will stand a long time . . . but we will fall at
last.”
   Simon was disconcerted. It was flattering to have Josua speak so openly
with him, but there was also something frightening about a prince so full of
foreboding, a prince who was willing to speak to a boy as though to his war
council. “Well,” Simon said at last, “well . . . surely everything will turn out
as God wills it.” He hated himself for such stupidity even as the words were
out of his mouth.
   Josua only laughed, a sour chuckle. “Ah, caught up by a mere lad, like
Usires on the famous thornbush. You are right, Simon. While we breathe
there’s hope, and I have you to thank for that.”
   “Only in part, Prince Josua.” Did that sound ungrateful, he wondered?
   The wintry look returned to the prince’s stern face. “I heard about the
doctor. A cruel blow to us all, but even crueler to you, I’m sure. We will
miss his wisdom—his goodness, too, but his wisdom more. I hope that
others can take up some of the slack.” Josua pulled up the chair again and
leaned forward. “There will be a council, and I think it must be soon.
Gwythinn, Lluth of Hernystir’s son, will be here tonight. There are already
others who have been waiting several days. Many plans hinge on what we
decide here, many lives.” Josua nodded his head slowly, musing.
   “Is . . . is Duke Isgrimnur alive, Prince?” Simon asked. “I . . . I spent a
night with his men on the journey here, but . . . but I left them.”
   “He and his men were here days ago, stopping before continuing toward
Elvritshalla. That is why I cannot wait—they might be weeks.” He looked
away again.
   “Can you wield a sword, Simon?” he asked suddenly. “Have you been
trained?”
   “Not really, sir.”
   “Then go to the captain of the guards and have him find someone to
work with you. We will need every arm, I think, especially strong young
ones.”
   “Of course, Prince Josua,” Simon said. The prince stood up and walked
to his table, turning his back as though the audience was over. Simon sat
frozen in his chair, wanting to ask another question, not sure of the
propriety. At last he stood up, too, and backed slowly toward the curtained
doorway. Josua continued to stare at Dendinis’ scroll. Simon was a step
from going out when he stopped, squared his shoulders, and asked the
question he had been balancing.
   “Prince Josua, sire,” he began, and the tall man looked back over his
shoulder.
   “Yes?”
   “Did . . . did the girl Marya . . . the girl who brought you the message
from your niece Miriamele . . .” He took a breath. “Do you know where she
is?”
   Josua raised an eyebrow. “Even in our darkest days, we cannot keep our
minds from them, can we?” The prince shook his head. “I’m afraid I cannot
help you there, young man. Good night.”
   Simon bobbed his head and backed out through the curtain.
   As he walked back from his unsettling audience with the prince, Simon
wondered what would become of them all. It had seemed such a victory to
reach Naglimund. For weeks he had thought of no other goal, followed no
other star. Torn away from his home, it had been something to pursue to
keep the larger questions at bay. Now what had seemed a paradise of safety
compared to the wild journey was suddenly yet another trap. Josua had as
much as said it: if they were not overrun, they would be starved.
   As soon as he reached Strangyeard’s tiny room he crawled into bed, but
he heard the sentries call out the hour twice more before he fell asleep.

                                   •••

   A groggy Simon answered the rap at the door, opening it to discover a
gray morning, a large wolf, and a troll.
   “I am startled to be finding you abed!” Binabik grinned wickedly. “A
few days out of the wilderness only and civilization has sunk its claws of
laziness into you!”
   “I am not,” Simon frowned, “in bed. Not any longer. But why aren’t
you?”
   “In bed?” Binabik asked, stumping slowly into the room and nudging the
door closed with his hip. “I am better—or better enough. Things there are to
do.” He squinted around the room as Simon sank back onto the edge of the
pallet and contemplated his own unshod feet. “Do you know where is the
pack we saved?” the troll asked at last.
    “Urrrh,” Simon grunted, then waved his hand at the floor. “It was under
the bed, but I think Father Strangyeard took it to get Morgenes’ book.”
    “Likely it is still there,” Binabik said, lowering himself gingerly to his
hands and knees. “The priest seems to me a man forgetful of people, but
who is putting things back in their place when he is finished with them.” He
scrabbled under the bed. “Aha! Here I have found it!”
    “Isn’t that bad, with your wound?” Simon asked, feeling guilty he had
not offered to do it himself. Binabik backed out and stood up, very
carefully, Simon noticed.
    “Trolls have fast healing,” he said, and smiled broadly, but Simon was
still worried.
    “I don’t think you should be up and around yet,” he said as Binabik rifled
through the pack. “That’s no way to get better.”
    “A fine trollmother you would make,” Binabik said without looking up.
“Will you be chewing my meat for me, too? Qinkipa! Where are those
bones!?”
    Simon got down on his knees to try and find his boots, but it was difficult
with the wolf padding up and down in the narrow chamber.
    “Can’t Qantaqa wait outside?” he asked as her broad flank bumped him
again.
    “Both of your friends will be happy to leave if we are bringing you
inconvenience, Simon,” the troll said primly. “Aia! Here they have been
hiding!”
    Outdone, the boy stared at the troll. Binabik was brave, clever, kind, had
been wounded at Simon’s side—and even without these things was anyway
too little to hit. Simon made a noise of disgust and frustration and crawled
over.
    “What do you need those bones for?” He peered over Binabik’s shoulder.
“Is my arrow still there?”
    “The arrow, yes,” his friend replied. “The bones? Because these are days
of decision, and I would be a fool to avoid any wise advising.”
    “The prince summoned me last night.”
   “I know.” Binabik shook the bones out of their sack and weighed them in
his hand. “I was speaking with him this morning. The Hernystiri have
arrived. There will be council tonight.”
   “He told you that?” Simon was more than a little disappointed to find
that he had not been Josua’s only confidante, but a little relieved as well to
find the responsibility shared. “Are you going to go there?”
   “As the only man of my people ever to enter the walls of Naglimund? As
the apprentice of Ookequk, Singing Man of the Mintahoq trolls? Of course I
will go. So also will you.”
   “Me?!” He felt caught off balance. “Why me? What in the name of the
good God would I do at a . . . a military council? I’m no soldier. I’m not
even a grown man!”
   “Certain it is you are not hurrying to be one.” Binabik made a mocking
face. “But even you cannot fight maturity away forever. Besides, your years
have no meaning in this. You have seen and heard things that may be
important, and Prince Josua would want you there.”
   “Would want? Did he ask for me?”
   The troll blew the hanging hair off his forehead impatiently. “Not with
exactness . . . but he asked me, and I will take you. Josua does not know all
you have seen.”
   “God’s Blood, Binabik!”
   “Please do not be swearing Aedonite oaths at me. Just because you are
having a beard . . . almost . . . does not make you a man to be cursing. Now
please let me have some silence to throw the bones, then I have more news
to tell.”
   Simon sat back, worried and upset. What if they asked him questions?
Was he going to be called to speak in front of barons and dukes and
generals and all? He, a runaway scullion?
   Binabik was crooning softly to himself, gently shaking the bones like a
trooper dicing in a tavern. They clicked and then tumbled free onto the slate
floor. He examined their position, then scooped them up and tossed them
twice more. He pursed his lips and stared intently at the last roll for some
time.
   “Clouds in the Pass . . .” he said at last, musing, “Wingless Bird . . .
Black Crevice.” He rubbed his lips with the back of his sleeve, then
thumped the heel of his hand once on his chest. “What am I to be making
from such a tale?”
   “Does it mean something?” Simon asked. “What are the words you just
said?”
   “They are the names for certain fallings—certain patterns. Three times
we throw, and each throw means different.”
   “I don’t . . . I . . . can you explain?” Simon said, then almost fell forward
as Qantaqa bulled past him to put her head on Binabik’s squat thigh.
   “Here,” the troll said, “first: Clouds in the Pass. Meaning where we stand
now it is hard to see far, but beyond is something very different than what is
behind.”
   “I could have told you that.”
   “Silence, trolling. Do you wish to remain foolish forever? Now, the one
that is second was Wingless Bird. The second is something of advantage,
but here it seems our helplessness might be itself useful, or so I am reading
the bones today. Last, what thing it is we should be aware of . . .”
   “Or fear?”
   “Or fear,” Binabik agreed calmly. “Black Crevice—that is a strange one,
one I never have gotten for myself. It could mean treachery.”
   Simon took a breath, remembering. “Like ‘false messenger’?”
   “True. But it is having other meanings, unusual meanings. My master
taught me that it could also be things coming from other places, breaking
through from other sides . . . thus, perhaps something about the mysteries
we have found . . . the Norns, your dreams . . . do you see?”
   “A little.” He stood up and stretched, then began looking for his shirt.
“What about the other news?”
   It took the troll, who was meditatively stroking Qantaqa’s back, a
moment to look up.
   “Ah,” he said at last, and reached into his jacket. “I have something for
your reading.” He pulled out a flattened roll of parchment and handed it up.
Simon felt his bare skin tingle.
   It was written in crisp but delicate script, a smattering of words in the
midst of the unrolled sheet.

     For Simon
       Here are thanks for your bravery on our journey. May the Good
   Lord always give you luck, friend.
   It was signed with the single letter “M.”
   “From her,” he said slowly. He didn’t know if he was disappointed or
delighted. “It is from Marya, isn’t it? Is this all she sent? Did you see her?”
   Binabik nodded his head. He looked sad. “I saw her, but it was only of a
moment. She said also that we would perhaps see her more, but there were
things that must be done first.”
   “What things? She makes me angry . . . no, I don’t mean that. Is she here
at Naglimund?”
   “She gave me the message, did she not?” Binabik got unsteadily to his
feet, but for the moment Simon was too consumed to pay much attention.
She had written! She had not forgotten! But she certainly had not written
much, and she hadn’t come to see him, to talk, to do anything. . . .
   Usires save me, is this being in love? he suddenly wondered. It was
nothing like the ballads he had heard sung—this was more irritating than
uplifting. He had thought he was in love with Hepzibah. He had certainly
thought about her a great deal, but it had mostly been about the way she
looked, she walked. With Marya, he certainly remembered how she looked,
but just as much he wondered what she thought.
   What she thinks! He was disgusted with himself. I don’t even know where
she comes from, let alone anything about how she thinks! I don’t know the
simplest thing about her . . . and if she likes me, it’s certainly not something
she bothered to write in this letter.
   And that was only the truth, he knew.
   But she said I was brave. She called me friend.
   He looked up from the parchment to see Binabik staring at him. The
troll’s expression was morose, but Simon was not sure why.
   “Binabik,” he began, but then could think of no question whose answer
would clear his muddy thoughts. “Well,” he said at last, “do you know
where the captain of the guard is? I have to get a sword.”

                                     •••

   The air was damp, and heavy gray skies hung over them as they walked
to the outer ward. A pressing crowd of people streamed through the city
gate, some bearing vegetables and flax and other things to sell, many
pulling rickety carts that seemed to be heaped with the pitiful entirety of
their worldly possessions. Simon’s companions, the diminutive troll and the
huge, yellow-eyed wolf, made no small impression on these newcomers:
some pointed and cried out anxious questions in rustic dialect, others shrank
back, making the protective sign of the Tree on their rough-suited breasts.
On all faces there were signs of fear—fear of the different, fear of the bad
days that had come to Erkynland. Simon felt torn between wishing he could
help them and wishing he did not have to see their homely, fretful faces.
   Binabik left him at the guardhouse, part of the gate building of the outer
ward, then went on to visit with Father Strangyeard in the castle library.
Simon quickly found himself before the captain of the guard, a drawn,
harried-looking young man who was several days unshaven. He was
bareheaded, his conical helm filled full of tally stones with which he was
counting the muster of the outland militias trickling into the castle. He had
been told to expect Simon, who was duly flattered the prince had
remembered him, and handed the youth over to the ministrations of a
bearlike North Erkynlandish guardsman named Haestan.
   “Ha’n’t got y’r growth yet, have ye?” Haestan growled, tugging his curly
brown beard as he eyed Simon’s lanky frame. “A bowman, then, tha’s the
story. Get ye a sword we will, but t’won’t be big enough t’do much. Bow’s
the thing.”
   Together they walked around the outer wall to the armory, a long narrow
room behind the ringing smithy. As the arms warden led them down rows
of battered armor and tarnished swords, Simon was saddened to see the
dregs of the castle armaments, slim protection against the shining legions
that Elias would no doubt put into the field.
   “No’ much left,” Haestan observed. “Warn’t half enough in first place.
Hope th’outland levies bring somewhat beside pitchfork and plowshare.”
   The limping warden at last found a scabbarded sword that the guardsman
deemed to be of proper slenderness for Simon’s size. It was crusty with
dried oil, and the warden was hard put to mask his frown of distaste.
“Polish it,” he said, “’twill be a fine piece.”
   Further search turned up a longbow that lacked only a string, but was
otherwise in good enough shape, and a leather quiver.
   “Thrithings work,” Haestan said, pointing out the round-eyed deer and
rabbits etched on the dark hide. “Make fine quivers, Thrithings-men do.”
Simon had a feeling the guardsman felt a little guilty over the
unprepossessing sword.
   Back at the guardhouse his new tutor wheedled a bowstring and half a
dozen arrows from the quartermaster, then showed Simon how to clean and
care for his new weapons.
   “Sharp it away, lad, sharp it away,” the burly guardsman said, making the
blade skitter across the whetstone, “lest otherways ye’ll be a girl afore ye’re
a man.” Somehow, against logic, he found a gleam of true steel beneath the
tarnish and grit.
   Simon had hoped to start immediately with sword wielding, or at least
some target shooting, but instead Haestan produced a pair of cloth-padded
wooden poles and took Simon out the city gate to the hillside above the
town. Simon quickly learned how little like real soldier-sparring his play
with Jeremias Chandler’s-boy had been.
   “Spear work’d be more use,” Haestan said as Simon sat on the turf,
wheezing over a buffet to the stomach. “As ’tis, though, we’ve none t’spare.
That’s why arrows be y’r game, boy. Still, s’nice t’know some swording for
close work. That’s when ye’ll thank old Haestan a hundredfold.”
   “Why . . . not . . . bow . . . ?” Simon panted.
   “T’morrow, boy, for bow’n’arrows . . . or day after.” Haestan laughed
and extended a broad paw. “Get on y’r feet. Jolliness’ just started for
th’day.”
   Weary, sore, threshed like wheat until he thought he could feel the chaff
trickling from his ears, Simon ate beans and bread at the guards’ afternoon
meal while Haestan continued the verbal part of his education, most of
which Simon missed due to a low and continuous ringing in his ears. He
was dismissed at last with a warning to be out sharp early the next morning.
He stumbled back to Strangyeard’s empty room and fell asleep without
even pulling off his boots.

                                     •••

   Rain spattered in through the open window, and thunder murmured in the
distance. Simon woke to find Binabik waiting for him as he had that
morning, as though the long, bruising afternoon had not occurred. That
illusion was quickly dispelled when he sat upright: every single muscle was
stiff. He felt as though he were a hundred years old.
    It took more than a little work for Binabik to convince him to get off the
bed. “Simon, this is no evening of sport for your attending or declining.
These are things on which our lives will hang balanced.”
    He had returned to his back. “I believe you . . . but if I get up, I’ll die.”
    “Enough.” The little man got hold of a wrist, braced his heels against the
floor, wincing as he slowly tugged Simon back into a sitting position. There
was a deep groan and a thump as one of Simon’s booted feet hit the floor,
then a long interval of silence before the second joined it.
    Long minutes later he was limping out the door at Binabik’s side, into the
gathering winds and chill rain.
    “Will we have to sit through supper as well?” Simon asked. For once in
his life he actually felt too sore to eat.
    “That I do not think. Josua is a strange one in that way; he is not for
eating and drinking much with his court. He has a desire for solitariness.
So, I am thinking, all have eaten before. That is indeed how I am
reconciling Qantaqa to staying in the room.” He smiled and patted Simon’s
shoulder. Simon winced. “All that we will feast on this night will be
worrying and arguing. Bad for digestion of troll, man, or wolf.”
    While the storm blustered loudly outside, the great hall of Naglimund
was dry, warmed by three huge open hearths, lit by the flames of countless
candles. The slanting beams of the roof disappeared in darkness high above,
and the walls were thick with somber religious tapestries.
    Scores of tables had been pushed together into the shape of a vast
horseshoe; Josua’s tall, narrow wooden chair stood at the apex of the arc,
inscribed with the Swan of Naglimund. Already half a hundred men had
installed themselves at different points along the rim of the shoe, talking
avidly among themselves—tall men, dressed in the furred robes and gaudy
trinkets of petty nobility for the most part, but some wearing the rough gear
of soldiers. Several looked up as the pair walked past, viewing them with
appraising eyes before turning back to their discussions.
    Binabik elbowed Simon’s hip. “They are thinking perhaps that we are the
hired tumblers.” He laughed, but Simon did not think he looked truly
amused.
   “Who are all these people?” Simon whispered as they sat down at the far
end of one of the horseshoe’s arms. A page set wine before them and added
hot water before shrinking back into the long shadows of the wall.
   “Lords of Erkynland loyal to Naglimund and Josua—or at least
undecided as yet in their loyalties. The stout one in red and white is
Ordmaer, baron of Utersall. He speaks with Grimstede, Ethelferth, and
some other lords.” The troll hefted his bronze goblet and drank. “Hmmm.
Our prince is not being profligate with his wine, or perhaps it is that he
wishes appreciation for the fine local water.” Binabik’s mischievous smile
reappeared; Simon slid back in his chair, fearing a similar reappearance of
the small, sharp elbow, but the small man only looked past him up the table.
   Simon took a long swallow of his wine. It was watery; he wondered
whether it was the seneschal or the prince himself who was tight with a
fithing piece. Still, it was better than nothing, and might serve to ease his
aching limbs. When he finished, the page scurried forward and filled it
again.
   More men trickled in, some animatedly conferring, others coolly
surveying those who had already arrived. A very, very old man in
sumptuous religious robes entered on the arm of a husky young priest and
began to set up various shiny articles near the head of the table; the look on
his face was one of definite bad temper. The younger man helped him into a
chair and then leaned down and whispered something into his ear. The elder
made a reply of seemingly dubious civility; the priest, with a long-suffering
glance at the roofbeams, strode from the room.
   “Is that the lector?” Simon asked in hushed tones.
   Binabik shook his head. “It seems very doubtful to me that the head of
your whole Aedonite church would be here in the den of an outlaw prince.
Likely that is Anodis, the bishop of Naglimund.”
   As Binabik spoke, a last clutch of men came in, and the troll broke off to
watch. Some, with hair in slender braids down their backs, wore the belted
white tunics of the Hernystiri. Their apparent leader, an intense, muscular
young man with long dark mustaches, was talking to a southerner of some
kind, an exceedingly well-dressed fellow who appeared only slightly older.
This one, hair carefully curled, robed in delicate shades of heather and blue,
was so neatly turned out that Simon felt sure even Sangfugol would be
impressed. Some of the old soldiers around the table were openly grinning
at the foppishness of his rig.
    “And these?” Simon asked. “The ones in white, with the gold ’round
their necks—Hernystirmen, yes?”
    “Correct. Prince Gwythinn that is, and his embassy. The other, my
guessing is, would be Baron Devasalles of Nabban. He has reputation as a
sharp wit, if a bit full of fondness for costume. A brave fighter, too, I was
told.”
    “How do you know all this, Binabik?” Simon asked, turning his attention
from the newcomers back to his friend. “Do you listen at keyholes?”
    The troll drew himself up haughtily. “I do not live always on
mountaintops, you know. Also, I have found Strangyeard and other
resources here, while you have been at keeping your bed warm.”
    “What!?” Simon’s voice came out louder than he had intended it to; he
realized he was at least a little drunk. The man seated beside him turned
with a curious glance; Simon leaned forward to continue his defense in a
quieter tone.
    “I have been . . .” he began, then chairs began creaking all over the hall
as their occupants suddenly stood. Simon looked up to see the slender
figure of Prince Josua, dressed in his customary gray, enter at the hall’s far
end. His expression was calm but unsmiling. The only indication of his rank
was the silver circlet on his brow.
    Josua nodded to the assembly and then seated himself; the others quickly
followed suit. As the pages came forward to pour wine, the old bishop at
Josua’s left hand—Hernystir’s Gwythinn sat at his right—rose.
    “Please, now,” the bishop sounded sour, as a man who does a favor he
knows will have no good result, “bow down your heads as we ask the
blessing of Usires Aedon on this table and its deliberation.” So saying, he
lifted a beautiful Tree of wrought gold and blue stones and held it before
him.
    “He who was of our world, but is not wholly of our flesh, hear us now.
    “He who was a man, but whose Father was no man, but rather the
breathing God, give us comfort.
    “Watch over this table, and those who take seat here, and put Your hand
on the shoulder of him who is lost and searching.”
   The old man took a breath and glared around the table. Simon, straining
to watch with his chin sunk on his breast, thought he looked as though he
would like to take his jeweled Tree and brain the lot of them.
   “Also,” the bishop finished in a rush, “forgive those assembled for any
damnable, prideful foolishness that might be spoken here. We are Your
children.”
   The old man teetered and dropped into his chair; there was murmur of
low conversation around the table.
   “Would you guess, Simon, that the bishop is not happy to be here?”
Binabik whispered.
   Josua rose. “Thank you, Bishop Anodis for your . . . heartfelt prayers.
And thanks to all who come to this hall.” He looked about the high, firelit
chamber, left hand on the table, the other hidden in the folds of his cloak.
“These are grave times,” he intoned, moving his glance from one face to the
other. Simon felt the warmth of the room well up in his, and wondered if the
prince would say anything about his rescue. He blinked, opening his eyes in
time to see Josua’s gaze slide quickly over him and return to the center of
the room. “Grave and troubling times. The High King in the Hayholt—and
yes, he is my brother, of course, but for our purposes here he is the king—
seems to have turned his back on our hardships. Taxes have been raised to
the point of cruel punishment, even as the land has suffered beneath fierce
drought in Erkynland and Hernystir and terrible storms in the north. At the
same time that the Hayholt reaches out to take more than it ever did under
King John’s reign, Elias has pulled back the troops that once kept the roads
open and safe, and which helped to garrison the emptier lands of the
Frostmarch and the Wealdhelm.”
   “Too true!” shouted Baron Ordmaer, and clanged a flagon on the table.
“God bless you but that’s true, Prince Josua!” He turned and waggled his
fist for the benefit of the others. There was a chorus of agreement, but there
were also others, Bishop Anodis among them, who shook their heads to
hear such rash words so early on.
   “And thus,” Josua said loudly, quieting the assembly, “thus we are faced
with a problem. What are we to do? That is why I have called you here and,
I presume, why you have come. To decide what we may do. To keep those
chains,” he lifted his left arm and showed the manacle still clasped there,
“off of our necks, that the king would put on us.”
    There was a handful of appreciative cries. The buzz of whispered speech
rose as well. Josua was waving his enshackled arm for silence when there
came a flash of red in the doorway. A woman swept into the room, long silk
dress like a torch flame. It was she whom Simon had seen in Josua’s
chambers, dark-eyed, imperious. Within moments she had reached the
prince’s chair, the eyes of the men following her with undisguised interest.
Josua seemed uncomfortable: as she bent down to whisper something in his
ear, he kept his gaze fixed on his wine cup.
    “Who is that woman?” Simon hissed, and was not the only one asking, to
judge by the rush of whispers.
    “Her name if Vorzheva. Daughter of a clan lord of the Thrithings, she is,
as well as being the prince’s . . . what? Woman, I suppose. They say she is
of great beauty.”
    “She is.” Simon continued to stare for a moment, then turned back to the
troll. “‘They say’! What do you mean, ‘they say’? She’s right there, isn’t
she?”
    “Ah, but I am having trouble judging.” He smiled. “It is that I do not like
the look of tall women.”
    The Lady Vorzheva had apparently finished giving her message. She
listened to Josua’s reply, then a moment later glided swiftly from the hall,
leaving only a final scarlet shimmer in the dark of the doorway.
    The prince looked up, and behind his placid face Simon thought he
detected something that looked like . . . embarrassment?
    “Now,” Josua began, “we were . . . ? Yes, Baron Devasalles?”
    The dandy from Nabban stood up. “You were saying, your Highness, that
we should be considering Elias only as king. But that is obviously not true.”
    “What do you mean?” asked the lord of Naglimund, above a
disapproving rumble from his liegemen.
    “Your pardon, prince, but what I mean is this: if he were only king we
would not be here, or at least Duke Leobardis would not have sent me. You
are the only other son of Prester John. Why else would we travel so far?
Otherwise, those who had complaints with the Hayholt would travel to the
Sancellan Mahistrevis, or to the Taig in Hernysadharc. But you are his
brother, yes? The king’s brother?”
    A chilly smile flickered across Josua’s mouth. “Yes, Baron, I am. And I
understand your meaning.”
   “Thank you, Highness.” Devasalles made a small bow. “Now the
question remains. What do you want, Prince Josua? Revenge? The throne?
Or merely an accommodation with a grasping king, one that will leave you
unmolested here at the Naglimund?”
   Now there was a full-blown growl from the Erkynlanders present, and a
few rose, brows beetling and mustaches quivering. But before any of them
could seize the moment, young Gwythinn of Hernystir leaped to his feet,
leaning across the table toward Baron Devasalles like a horse straining at
the bit.
   “The gentleman from Nabban wants a word, eh? Well, then, here’s mine.
Fight! Elias has insulted my father’s blood and throne, and has sent the
King’s Hand to our Taig with threats and harsh words, like a man punishing
children. We do not need to weigh the this and that of it—we are ready to
fight!”
   Several people cheered the Hernystirman’s bold words, but Simon,
looking fuzzily about the room as he finished the last drops of another cup
of wine, saw even more looking worried, talking quietly with their
tablemates. Beside him Binabik was frowning, mirroring the expression that
shadowed the face of the prince.
   “Hear me!” Josua cried. “Nabban, in the person of Leobardis’ emissary,
has asked hard but fair questions, and I will answer them.” He turned his
cold stare to Devasalles. “I have no wish to be king, Baron. My brother
knew that, yet still he captured me, killed a score of my men, and held me
in his dungeons.” He brandished the arm shackle again. “For that, yes, I do
wish revenge—but if Elias was ruling well and fairly, I would sacrifice the
revenge for the good of Osten Ard, and especially my Erkynland. As to
accommodation . . . I do not know if that is possible. Elias has grown
dangerous and difficult; some say that he crosses over into madness at
times.”
   “Who says?” Devasalles asked. “Lords who chafe under his admittedly
heavy hand? We speak of a possible war that will tear our nations like rotted
cloth. It would be a shame if it started over rumors.”
   Josua leaned back and summoned a page, whispering a message to him.
The boy virtually flew out of the hall.
   A muscular, bearded man in white furs and silver chains stood. “If the
baron remembers me not, I will remind him,” he said, plainly
uncomfortable. “Ethelferth, Lord of Tinsett am I, and I wish to say only
this; if my prince says the king has lost his wits, well, that word is good
enough for me.” He furrowed his brow and sat.
   Josua stood up, slender, gray-clad body uncoiling like a rope. “Thanks to
you, Lord Ethelferth, for your good words. But,” he cast his eyes around the
assembly, which quieted to watch him, “no one need take my word for
anything, or the words of other of my liegemen. Instead I bring to you one
whose firsthand knowledge of Elias’s ways you will, I am sure, find easy to
trust.” He waved his left hand toward the near door of the hall, the one
through which the page had disappeared. The boy had reentered; behind
him in the doorway were two figures. One was the Lady Vorzheva. The
other, dressed in sky blue, stepped past Vorzheva into the pool of light
around the wall sconce.
   “My lords,” Josua said, “the Princess Miriamele—daughter of the High
King.”
   And Simon, gaping, stared at the short, cropped strands of golden hair
that showed beneath the veil and crown, shed of their dark disguise . . . and
staring at the oh-so-familiar face, felt a great tumbling inside him. He
almost stood, as the others were doing, but his knees went watery and
dropped him back into his chair. How? Why? This was her secret—her
rotten, treacherous secret!
   “Marya,” he murmured, and as she sat in the chair Gwythinn surrendered
to her, acknowledging his gesture with a precise, gracious nod of her head,
and as everyone else sat down again, talking aloud in their wonder, Simon
finally lurched to his feet.
   “You,” he said to Binabik, grabbing the little man’s shoulder, “did . . . did
you know?!”
   The troll seemed about to say something, then grimaced instead and
shrugged. Simon looked up across the sea of heads to find Marya . . .
Miriamele . . . staring at him with wide, sad eyes.
   “Damn!” he hissed, then turned and hurried from the room, his eyes
pooling with shameful tears.